--- YouTube Channel Transcript Export ---
Channel: Andrew Huberman (ID: UC2D2CMWXMOVWx7giW1n3LIg)
Export Date: 2025-05-12 14:44:21
Total Videos Found (in channel): 349
Preferred Languages: en
--- Videos starting from 321st in this file ---
========================================

--- Video 321 ---
Video ID: w9MXqXBZy9U
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w9MXqXBZy9U
Title: Dr. Karl Deisseroth: Understanding & Healing the Mind
Published: 2021-06-28 12:00:21 UTC
Description:
Karl Deisseroth, MD, PhD, is a Clinical Psychiatrist and scientist who directs a bioengineering research laboratory at Stanford University School of Medicine. His work aims to understand and develop treatments for disorders of the mind such as depression, attention deficit disorders (ADHD & ADD), autism, schizophrenia, anxiety, eating disorders, borderline personality and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). We discuss his experience treating his patients and his laboratory’s mission to find and develop cures for mental disease and tools for probing how the brain works. 

#HubermanLab #Neuroscience #Mind

Dr. Karl Deisseroth
Twitter: https://twitter.com/KarlDeisseroth
New book: https://amzn.to/3diiKHG
Lab Website: https://web.stanford.edu/group/dlab/

Thank you to our sponsors
ROKA - https://www.roka.com/huberman
InsideTracker - https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman
Athletic Greens - https://www.athleticgreens.com/huberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introduction
00:07:41 Using Language to Understand the Mind 
00:12:19 Blood Tests For Mental Disease
00:13:38 The Largest Challenges Facing Treatment of Mental Health
00:20:21 Predicting Depression & Suicide
00:22:47 Drugs That Work for Brain Illness
00:27:01 What Would A Cure For the Broken Mind Look Like?
00:32:23 Channelopsins: Tools For Understanding & Treating the Mind
00:39:10 Curing Blindness with Channelopsins
00:41:58 Why Karl Became a Scientist
00:47:10 Vagus Nerve In Depression
00:54:12 Challenges To Overcome for Treating Mental Illness with Channelopsins
00:58:34 Using the Dialogue with Patients to Guide Treatment
01:00:52 How Our Eyes Reveal Our Mental Health
01:06:04 Controlling Structures Deep In the Brain
01:08:23 The Most Effective Drugs Often Have the Most Side Effects
01:09:50 Do Psychiatrists Take the Drugs They Prescribe?
01:14:15 Moving From Experimental Tools To Novel Treaments
01:16:00 Brain-Machine Interfaces & Neuralink
01:19:30 ADHD & Dr. Deissroth’s Approach To Focusing His Mind
01:26:36 How Dr. Deisseroth Balances A Career In Medicine, Science & Family
01:35:41 New Ways of Exploring Brains: CLARITY
01:38:49 What Is Special About the Human Brain?
01:46:03 Psychedelics 
01:54:12 MDMA
01:57:15 Dr. Deisseroth’s New Book “Projections: A Story of Emotions”
01:59:42 Connecting with Dr. Deisseroth on Twitter

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
[gentle upbeat music] - [Andrew] Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science, and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today, I have the pleasure of introducing the first guest of the Huberman Lab Podcast. My guest is Dr. Karl Deisseroth. Dr. Karl Deisseroth is a medical doctor, he's a psychiatrist and a research scientist at Stanford School of Medicine. In his clinical practice, he sees patients dealing with a range of nervous system disorders, including obsessive compulsive disorder, autism, attention deficit disorders, schizophrenia, mania, anxiety disorders, and eating disorders. His laboratory develops and explores tools with which to understand how the nervous system works in the healthy situation, as well as in disorders of the mind. Dr. Deisseroth's laboratory has pioneered the development and use of what are called channelopsins, proteins that come from algae, which can now be introduced to the nervous systems of animals and humans, in order to precisely control the activity of neurons in the brain and body with the use of light. This is a absolutely transformative technology, because whereas certain drug treatments can often relieve certain symptoms of disorders, they often carry various side effects. And in some individuals, often many individuals, these drug treatments simply do not work. The channelopsins and their related technologies stand to transform the way that we treat psychiatric illness, and various disorders of movement and perception. In fact, just recently, the channelopsins were applied in a human patient, to allow an adult fully blind human being to see light, for the very first time. We also discuss Dr. Deisseroth's newly released book, which is entitled "Projections: A Story of Human Emotions". This is an absolutely remarkable book, that uses stories about his interactions with his patients, to teach you how the brain works in the healthy and diseased state, and also reveals the motivation for and discovery of these channelopsins and other technologies by Karl's laboratory, that are being used now to treat various disorders of the nervous system, and that in the future, are certain to transform the fields of psychiatry, mental health, and health in general. I found our conversation to be an absolutely fascinating one about how the brain functions in the healthy state, and why and how it breaks down in disorders of the mind. We also discuss the current status and future of psychedelic treatments for psychiatric illness, as well as we're understanding how the brain works more generally. We also discuss issues of consciousness, and we even delve into how somebody like Karl who's managing a full-time clinical practice and a 40 plus person laboratory, and a family of five children and is happily married, how he organizes his internal landscape, his own thinking in order to manage that immense workload and to progress forward for the sake of medicine and his pursuits in science. I found this to be an incredible conversation, I learned so much. I also learned, through the course of reading Karl's book, "Projections", that not only is he an accomplished psychiatrist, and obviously an accomplished research scientist and a family man, but he's also a phenomenal writer. "Projections" is absolutely masterfully written. It's just beautiful, and it's accessible to anybody, even if you don't have a science background. So, I hope that you'll enjoy my conversation with Karl Deisseroth as much as I did, and thank you for tuning in. Before we begin, I want to point out that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. In my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public, I'd like to acknowledge the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Roka. Roka makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that in my opinion, are the very highest quality out there. The company was founded by two All-American swimmers from Stanford, and everything about the eyeglasses and sunglasses was developed with performance in mind. One of the things I really love about Roka sunglasses, is that unlike other sunglasses that make it hard to see when there's a lot of cloud cover, or when the shadows change or environmental conditions change, with Roka sunglasses, they clearly understand the signs of the visual system, because when I put them on for the first time, I noticed that as I moved into shadows or the cloud cover changed or the day got brighter or dimmer, everything was still crystal clear. And that's also because the lenses are tremendously high optical clarity, and the glasses are really lightweight. You don't even notice that they're on. The other thing is that the eyeglasses, I wear readers at night, they're incredibly lightweight, and for both the sunglasses and eyeglasses, the aesthetic is terrific. Unlike a lot of performance eyewear, which frankly can look kind of cyborg-like and kind of ridiculous, the aesthetic of the glasses is such that you could really wear them anywhere, indoors or outdoors. If you'd like to try Roka eyeglasses, you can go to Roka, that's R-O-K-A.com, and enter the code "Huberman", to save 20% on your first order. That's Roka, R-O-K-A.com, and enter the code "Huberman", at checkout. Today's podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA, to help you better understand your body and reach your health goals. I'm a big believer in getting regular blood work done. And now with the advent of good genetic DNA tests, I'm also a believer in analyzing your DNA. The simple reason for this is that many of the factors that impact our immediate and longterm health, can only be measured and evaluated with a quality blood test. And now, the DNA tests further inform our immediate and long-term health. One of the problems with a lot of DNA tests and blood tests out there however, is that you get the information back, and you don't know what to do with that information. With InsideTracker, you get the numbers back of different metabolic factors, hormones, et cetera, but it also provides simple directives, as to how perhaps you might want to change your nutritional intake or your exercise regimen, or other lifestyle factors, to bring those numbers into alignment with where you'd like them to be. InsideTracker also makes this really easy. They have a dashboard that makes organizing that all very simple, and they can even have someone come to your house to take the blood and DNA test. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman, to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Just use the code "Huberman", at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I started taking Athletic Greens way back in 2012, and I've taken it ever since, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and that I continue to take Athletic Greens, is that it covers all my vitamin and mineral bases, and it covers my probiotic needs. There's now a wealth of data showing that probiotics support a healthy gut microbiome, and that a healthy gut microbiome supports the gut brain access for healthy mood. It also supports metabolism, immune function, endocrine, that means hormone function, and a host of other important biological functions. I drink it once or twice a day. I mix it with water and a little bit of lemon juice or some lime juice, and it's absolutely delicious. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, and if you do that, you can claim a special offer, where they will give you a year's supply of vitamin D3. In addition, they'll give you five free travel packs. Vitamin D3 as we all know, is very important for a huge range of biological functions and health. Again, that's athleticgreens.com/huberman, for your Athletic Greens, the five free travel packs, and the year's supply of vitamin D3. And now, my conversation with Dr. Karl Deisseroth. Well, thanks for being here. - Thanks for having me. - It's been a long time coming for me, because you may not know this, but one of the reasons I started this podcast was actually so I could have this conversation. [Karl laughs] It's but one, there are other reasons, but one of the goals is to be able to hold conversations with colleagues of mine that are doing incredible work in the realm of science, and then here we also have this really special opportunity because you're also a clinician. You see patients and have for a long time. So for people that might not be so familiar with the fields of neuroscience, et cetera, what is the difference between neurology and psychiatry? - Well, I'm married to a neurologist and I am a psychiatrist and we make fun of each other all the time. A lot of neuroscientists and a lot of brain clinicians actually think these two should be in the same field at some point in the future, they were in the past, they started together. Psychiatry though, focuses on disorders where we can't see something that's physically wrong, where we don't have a measurable, where there's no blood test that makes the diagnosis, there's no brain scan that tells us this is schizophrenia, and this is depression for an individual patient. And so psychiatry is much more mysterious, and the only tools we have are words. Neurologists are fantastic physicians. They see the stroke on brain scans, they see the seizure and the pre-seizure activity with an EEG, and they can measure and treat based on those measureables. In psychiatry, we have a harder job, I think. We use words, we have rating scales for symptoms, we can measure depression and autism with rating scales, but those are words still. And ultimately, that's what psychiatry is built around. It's an odd situation because we've got the most complex, beautiful, mysterious, incredibly engineered object in the universe, and yet all we have are words to find our way in. - So, do you find that if a patient is very verbal or hyper-verbal, that you have an easier time diagnosing them, as opposed to somebody who's more quiet and reserved? Or it's, I could imagine the opposite might be true as well. - Well, because we only have words, you've put your finger on a key point. If they don't speak that much, in principle, it's harder. The lack of speech can be a symptom. We can see that in depression, we can see that in the negative symptoms of schizophrenia, we can see that in autism. Sometimes by itself, that is a symptom, reduced speech, but ultimately you do need something. You need some words to help guide you and in fact, there's challenges that I can tell you about where patients with depression were so depressed, they can't speak. That makes it a bit of a challenge to distinguish depression from some of the other reasons they might not be speaking. And this is sort of the art and the science of psychiatry. - Do you find that there are patients that have, well, let's call them comorbidities or conditions where they would land in both psychiatry and neurology, meaning there's damage to a particular area of the brain and therefore they're depressed? And how do you tease that out as a psychiatrist? - Yeah, this happens all the time. Parkinson's disease is a great example. It can be debilitating in so many ways. People have trouble moving, they have trouble walking, they have trouble swallowing, and they can have a truly severe depression. And this is where you might say, "Oh, well, they've got a life-threatening illness", but there are plenty of neurological disorders where depression is not a strongly comorbid symptom, like ALS, Lou Gehrig's disease, for example, depression is not strongly comorbid in that disease, but in Parkinson's, it is extremely common. And as you know, in Parkinson's disease, we have loss of the dopamine neurons in the midbrain. And this is a very specific population of cells that's dying, and probably that leads to both the movement disorder and the depression. There are many examples of that where these two fields come together and you really need to work as a team. I've had patients in my clinic, that I treat the depression associated with their Parkinson's, and a neurologist treats the movement associated with the Parkinson's and we work together. - Do you think we will ever have a blood test for depression or schizophrenia or autism? And would that be a good or a bad thing? - I think ultimately there will be quantitative tests. Already, efforts are being made to look at certain rhythms in the brain using external EEGs to look at brain waves effectively, look at the ratios of certain frequencies to other frequencies, and there's some progress being made on that front. It's not as good as it could be. It doesn't really give you the confidence for the individual patient that you would like, but ultimately, what's going on in the brain in psychiatric disease is physical, and it's due to the circuits and the connections and the projections in the brain that are not working as they would in a typical situation. And I do think we'll have those measureables at some point. Now, is that good or bad? I think that will be good, and one of the challenges we have with psychiatry is it is an art as well as a science to elicit these symptoms in a precise way. It does take some time, and it would be great if we could just do quick measurements. Could it be abused or misused? Certainly. But that's I think true, for all of medicine. - I want to know, and I'm sure there are several, but what do you see as the biggest challenge facing psychiatry and the treatment of mental illness today? - I think we're making progress on what the biggest challenge is, which I think there's still such a strong stigma for psychiatric disease that patients often don't come to us, and they feel that they should be able to handle this on their own. And that can slow treatment. It can lead to worsening symptoms. We know, for example, patients who have untreated anxiety issues. If you go for a year or more with a serious untreated anxiety issue, that can convert to depression. You can add another problem on top of the anxiety. And so it would be... Why do people not come for treatment? They feel like this is something they should be able to master on their own, which can be true, but usually, some help is a good thing. - That raises a question related to something I heard you say many years ago at a lecture, which was that, this was a scientific lecture and you said, "We don't know how other people feel. Most of the time, we don't even really know how we feel." - [chuckles] Yeah. - [Andrew] Maybe you could elaborate on that a little bit and the dearth of ways that we have to talk about feelings. I mean, there's so many words. I don't know how many, but I'm guessing they're more than a dozen words to describe the state that I call sadness, but as far as I understand, we don't have any way of comparing that in a real objective sense. As a psychiatrist, when your job is to use words to diagnose, words of the patient to diagnose, do you maneuver around that? And what is this landscape that we call feelings or emotions? - This is really interesting. Here there's a tension between the words that we've built up in the clinic that mean something to the physicians, and then there's the colloquial use of words that may not be the same, and so that's the first level we have to sort out when someone says, "I'm depressed", what exactly do they mean by that? And that may be different from what we're talking about in terms of depression. So part of psychiatry is to get beyond that word, and to get into how they're actually feeling, get rid of the jargon and get to real world examples of how they're feeling. So, how much do you look forward into the future? How much hope do you have? How much planning are you doing for the future? So here now you're getting into actual things you can talk about that are unambiguous. If someone says, "Yeah, I can't even think about tomorrow. I don't see how I'm going to get to tomorrow". That's a nice, precise thing that you know, it's sad, it's tragic, but also, that means something. And we know what that means. That's the hopelessness symptom of depression. And that is what I try to do when I do a psychiatric interview. I try to get past the jargon, and get to what's actually happening in a patient's life and in their mind. But as you say, ultimately, [chuckles] and this shows up across... I address this issue every day in my life, whether it's in the lab where we're looking at animals, whether fish or mice or rats and studying their behavior, or when I'm in a conversation with just a friend or a colleague, or when I'm talking to a patient, I never really know what's going on inside the mind of the other person. I get some feedback, I get words, I get behaviors, I get actions, but I never really know. And as you said at the very beginning of the question, often we don't even have the words and the insight to even understand what's going on in our own mind. I think a lot of psychiatrists are pretty introspective. That's part of the reason they end up in that specialty, and so, maybe we spend a little more time than the average person thinking about what's going on within, but it doesn't mean we have the answers. - So in this area of trying to figure out what's going on under the hood through words, it sounds like certain words would relate to this idea of anticipation and hope. Is it fair to say that that somehow relates to the dopamine system in the sense that dopamine is involved in motivated behaviors? I mean, if I say for instance, and I won't ask you to run a session with me here [chuckles] for free. [Karl laughs] - We'll do that off camera. - [Andrew] Off camera. Right. If I were to say, "I just can't imagine tomorrow. I just can't do it." So that's not an action-based, that's purely based on my internal narrative, but I could imagine things like, you know, I have a terrible time sleeping, I'm not hungry, I'm not eating, so statements about physical actions, I'm guessing also have validity. - Absolutely. - And there are now ways to measure the accuracy of those statements. Like for instance, if I gave you permission, you could know if I slept last night, or whether or not I was just saying I had a poor night's sleep. - Yes. That's right. - So in moving forward through 2021 and into the next 10 and 100 years of psychiatry, do you think that the body reporting some of the actions of a human are going to become useful and mesh with the words in a way that's going to make your job easier? - I do think that's true. And the two things you've mentioned, eating and sleeping, those are additional criteria that we use to diagnose depression. These are the vegetative signs, we call them of depression, poor sleep, and poor eating. And if you have a baseline for somebody, that's the real challenge there. What's different in that person? Some people with depressed, they sleep more. Some people who are depressed, they sleep less. Some people who are depressed, they're more physically agitated, and they move around more. Some people who are depressed, they move less even while they're awake. And so you need... Here's the challenge is that you can't just look at how they are now. You have to get a baseline, and then see how it's changed. And that can be a challenge that raises ethical issues, and how do you collect that baseline information from someone healthy? I don't think that's something we have solved. Of course, with phones and accelerometers and phones, you could in principle, collect a lot of baseline information from people, but that would have to be treated very carefully for privacy reasons. - And in terms of measuring one's own behavior, I've heard of work that's going on. Sam Golden up in the University of Washington who works on aggression in animal models was telling me that there's some efforts that he's making, and perhaps you're involved in this work as well, I don't know, of devices that would allow people to detect, for instance, when they're veering towards a depressive episode for themselves, that they may choose or not choose to report that to their clinician, maybe they don't even have a clinician. Maybe this person that you referred to at the beginning, this person who doesn't feel comfortable coming to talk to you, maybe something is measuring changes in the inflection of their voice, or the speed at which they get up from a chair. Do you think that those kind of metrics will eventually inform somebody, "Hey, you know, you're in trouble"? This is getting to back to the statement that I heard you make and it rung in my mind now, I think for more than a decade, which is, "Oftentimes, we don't even know how we feel." - Yeah. You know, that I do like, because that gives the patient the agency to detect what's going on, and even separate from modern technology, this has been part of the art of psychiatry is to help patients realize that sometimes other people observing them can give them the earliest warning signs of depression. We see this very often in family. They'll notice when the patient is changing before the patient does. And then there are things the patient may notice, but not correctly ascribe to the onset of depression. And a classic example of that is what we call 'early morning awakening'. And this is something that can happen very early as people start to slide into depression. They start to wake up earlier and earlier, just inexplicably, they're awake at- - This is like 2:00 AM, 3:00 AM awakening? - It could start... Yeah, it could start at 5:00 AM, could go to four, and three- - And are unable to fall back asleep? - Unable to fall back asleep. Exactly. And they may not know what to do with that. It could just be, [chuckles] from their perspective, it's just something that's happening. But if you put enough of that information together, that could be a useful warning sign for the patient and it could help them seek treatment. And I think that is something that could be really valuable. - Interesting. So, in this framework of needing words to self-report or machines to detect how we feel and maybe inform a psychiatrist how a patient feels, touch on some of the technologies that you've been involved in building, but as a way to march into that, are there any very good treatments for psychiatric disease? Meaning, are there currently any pills, potions, forms of communication that reliably work every time, or work in most patients? And could you give a couple examples of great successes of psychiatry if they exist? - Yes. Yeah, we are fortunate. And this [chuckles] coming back to my, you know, the joking between my wife and myself in terms of neurology and psychiatry, we actually in psychiatry, despite the depths of the mystery we struggled with, many of our treatments are actually... We may be doing better than some other specialties in terms of actually causing therapeutic benefit for patients. We do help patients, the patients who suffer from... By the way, both medications and talk therapy have been shown to be extremely effective in many cases, for example, people with panic disorder, cognitive behavioral therapy, just working with words, helping people identify the early signs of when they're starting to move toward a panic attack, what are the cognitions that are happening? You can train people to derail that, and you can very potently treat panic disorder that way. - How long does something like that take on average? - For a motivated, insightful patient, you can have a very cookbooky series of sessions, that's six to 12 sessions, or even less for someone who's very insightful and motivated and it can have a very powerful effect that quickly. And that's just with words, there are many psychiatric medications that are very effective for the conditions that they're treating. Anti-psychotic medications, they have side effects, but boy, do they work! They really can clear up particularly the positive symptoms of schizophrenia for example, the auditory hallucinations, the paranoia, people's lives can be turned around by these- - We should clarify positive symptoms. You mean not positive in the qualitative sense, you mean positive meaning that the appearance of something abnormal. - Exactly. Yeah. Thank you for that clarification. When we say positive symptoms, we do mean the addition of something that wasn't there before, like a hallucination or a paranoia, and that stands in contrast to the negative symptoms where something is taken away, and these are patients who are withdrawn. They have what we call thought blocking. They can't even progress forward in a sequence of thoughts. Both of those can be part of schizophrenia, the hallucinations and the paranoia are more effectively treated right now, but they are effectively treated. And then, this is a frustrating, and yet heartening aspect of psychiatry. There are treatments like electroconvulsive therapy, where it's extremely effective for depression. We have patients who nothing else works for them, where they can't tolerate medications, and you can administer under a very safe, controlled condition, where the patient's body is not moving. They're put into a very safe situation where the body doesn't move or cease, it's just an internal process that's triggered in the brain. This is an extraordinarily effective treatment for treatment-resistant depression. At the same time, I find it [chuckles] as heartening as it is to see patients respond to this who have severe depression, I'm also frustrated by it. Why can't we do something more precise than this, for these very severe cases? And people have sought for decades to understand, how is it that a seizure is leading to the relief of depression? And we don't know the answer yet. We would love to do that. People are working hard on that, but that is a treatment that does work too. In all of these cases though in psychiatry, the frustrating thing is that we don't have the level of understanding that a cardiologist has in thinking about the heart. You know, the heart is, we now know it's a pump. It's pumping blood. and so you can look at everything about how it's working or not working, in terms of that frame, it's clearly a pump. We don't really have that level of, what is the circuit really there for in psychiatry? And that's what is missing. That's what we need to find, so we can design truly effective and specific treatments. - So, what are the pieces that are going to be required to cure autism, cure Parkinson's, cure schizophrenia? I would imagine there are several elements and 'beens here', understanding the natural biology, understanding what the activity patterns are, how to modify those, maybe you could just tell us what you think, what is the Bento Box of the perfect cure? - I think the first thing we need is understanding. Almost every psychiatric treatment has been serendipitously identified, just noting by chance that something that was done for some person also had a side effect- - Like lithium or something- - Like lithium, is a good example. - Is it true that it was the urine of guinea pigs [Karl laughs] given lithium that was given to manic patients that made them not manic? Is that true? - I don't have firsthand knowledge of that, but I would defer that, but it's true for essentially every treatment, that the antidepressants originally arose as anti-tuberculosis drugs, for example. - I did not know that. - Yeah, and so this is a classic example for illnesses across all of psychiatry, and of course there's the seizures as well. That was noticed that patients who had epilepsy, they had a seizure there and also had depression, that they became much, at least for awhile, they were improved after that seizure. - That's amazing. I don't want to take you off course of the question answering the question I asked, but I've heard before that if autistic children get a fever, that their symptoms improve, is that true? - I've done a fair bit of work with autism. In my clinical practice, I work with adult autism and I have heard statements like that and descriptions like that from patients and their families. That is very hard to study quantitatively because often with the children, you have this not as quantitative as you'd like collection of symptom information from home. But I have heard that enough that I think there may well be something to that. And anytime you have a fever, what's going on? Well, we know all the cells in the brain, and I know this as an electrophysiologist, if you just change the temperature by a few degrees, everything changes about how neurons work and that's even just a single neuron. It's even more likely to be complex and different with a circuit of neurons that are all affecting each other. Just elevate the temperature a little bit, everything's different. And so, it's plausible for sure, that things like that could happen and do happen. And yet, when you think about autism, to take your example, yes, we see changes, but what is the elements of the brain that's analogous to the pumping heart? When we think about the symptoms of depression, we think about motivation and dopamine neurons. When we think about autism, it's a little more challenging. There's a deficit in social interaction and in communication. And so where is that? [chuckles] Where is that situated? What is the key principle governing the social interaction? This is where we need the basic science to bring us a step forward, so we can say okay, this is the process that's going on. This is what's needed for the incredibly complex task of social interaction, where you've got incredibly rich data streams of sound and meaning, eye contact, body movement, and that's just for one person. What if there's a group of people? This is overwhelming for people with autism. What's the unifying thing there? It's a lot of information, and that maybe is unmatched in any realm of biology, the amount of information coming in through a social interaction, particularly with words and language. And so then, that turns our attention as neuroscientists, we think, okay, let's think about the parts of the brain that are involved in dealing with merging complex data streams that are very high in bit rate that need to be fused together into a unitary concept. And that starts to guide us, and we know other animals are social in their own way, and we can study those animals. And so that's how I think about it. There's hope for the future, thinking about the symptoms as an engineer might, and trying to identify the circuits that are likely working to make this typical behavior happen, and that will help us understand how it becomes atypical. - So that seems like the first to me, the first been of this, what I call the Bento Box for lack of a better analogy, that we need to know the circuits. We need to know the cells in the various brain regions and end portions of the body and how they connect to one another, and what the patterns of activity are under a normal 'healthy interaction'. - [Karl] Yeah. - If we understand that, then it seems that the next step, which of course could be carried out in parallel, right? Though that work can be done alongside work where various elements within those circuits are tweaked just right, like the tuning of a piano in the subtle way, or maybe even like the replacement of a whole set of keys if the piano is lacking keys, so to speak. - Right. - You've been very involved in trying to generate those tools. Tell us about channelopsins, why you created them, and where they're at now in the laboratory and perhaps also in the clinic. - Well, first of all, I give nature the credit for creating channelrhodopsins. These are beautiful little proteins that are made by algae, single-celled green algae. And there's a great story in basic science that our understanding of animal behavior, sensation, cognition and action in our brains all the way back to a botanist in the 1850s and 1860s in Russia, is where the story begins. So this was a botanist named Andrei Famintsyn who worked at St. Petersburg, and he had noticed in the river near his laboratory, that there were algae that he could look at in a dish, in a saucer. He could put them there and he had light shining from the side. The green tinge in the saucer of water would move to a particular distance from the light that he was shining from the side, which was an amazing thing. If he made the light brighter, the green tinge would back off a little bit to a more optimal location, so just the right light level. So this was plant behavior. It was light-driven plant behavior, and he delves into this a little bit. He identified that with microscopy, he could see that there were little single-cell algae with flagella that were swimming to the right light level. So behaving plants, and this has been the secret that's helped us unlock so many principles of animal behavior. So turns out, these algae achieve this amazing results with a single gene that encodes a single protein. What's a protein? It's just a little bio-molecule that does a job in a cell. And these are proteins that sit in the surface of cells in their surface membrane, and when a photon, a light particle hits them, they open a little pore, a little hole in the membrane and charged particles, ions like sodium rush across the pore. Now, why do they do that? They do that to guide their flagella, that signal coming in, those ions coming in through the pore in response to light, guide their flagella motor, that guides them to a particular spot in the saucer. Now, that's plant behavior, but it turns out, as you know, this movement of ions across the membrane, this happens to also be a neural code in our brains for on or off. Sodium ions rushing into the cells, turns them on. It makes them fire away, fire action potentials communicate to the next cell down the chain, and this is an amazing opportunity because we can borrow these proteins. In fact, we can take the gene that directs the creation of the protein, and we can use genetic tricks, modern genetic tricks to put that gene into neurons in the brains of mammals, and then use light to turn those cells, the specific cells that we put this gene into, turn them on. There are other opsins, we call them, that you can use to turn cells off. It's all fast, real time. You can play in patterns of activity in real time into cells or kinds of cells, just as a conductor elicits the music from the orchestra, the strings and the woodwinds. And you can see what matters. What matters for sensation, what matters for cognition, what matters for action, and we call this optogenetics. - Beautiful, and I must say it was quite an honor and a privilege to watch optogenetics move from idea to discovery to the laboratory. I think we were postdocs at the same time, - We were, huh? - which is living proof that people move at different rates, because [laughs] it's a joke at my expense by the way, [Karl laughing] but it's really- - We end up in the same spot. [laughs] - That's right, [laughs] yeah, more or less. Physically, if not professionally, but nonetheless, it's been a marvelous story thus far. And I'd like to... Maybe you could give us... I'd like to just touch on a couple examples of where the technology resides in laboratories now, so maybe the range of animals that it's being used in, and some of the phenomenon that channelrhodopsins and their related genes and proteins are starting to elicit, what you've seen, and then I'd like to talk about their applicability to the clinic, which is I think the bigger mission, if you will. - Yeah. So this whole thing, you know, it's been about, now going on 17 years that we've been putting channelrhodopsins into neurons. It started just like Andre Famintsyn's work in a dish, that was in 2004. In 2007, we were putting these into behaving mice, and we were able to with a flick of a switch, cause them to move one direction or another, by 2009- - So basically, you're controlling the mouse's behavior? - Yeah, exactly. In real time. So we could make a mouse that was just sitting there doing nothing, to then turn left very consistently, in fact, go around in a circle and as soon as we turn off the light, it would stop. That was an eye-opening moment. It took really a few years to make optogenetics work. There was a lot of putting all the... There are a lot of problems that had to be solved. These channelrhodopsins actually don't move many ions. They have a small current, small conductance, as we say. And so we had to figure out ways to pack a lot of them into cells without damaging cells, and still make them targetable, so we don't want them to just be in all the cells, 'cause then it becomes just like an electrode. You're just stimulating all the cells that are nearby. We had to keep that specificity, make them targetable to just one kind of cell or another, while still packing in large numbers of them into those cells. And we had to get in the light in safe and specific ways, and so it took probably about four or five years to really create optogenetics between 2004 and 2009. By the end of that time though, we had all the basic light delivery, gene delivery, principles worked out, and people started to apply the technology to fish, to rats, to mice, to non-human primates like monkeys, and just a couple months ago, my colleague, Botond Rosca in Switzerland, succeeded in putting channelrhodopsins into the eyes of human beings and making a blind person to see. And so that's pretty cool. This was a patient with retinal degeneration, and he provided a channelrhodopsin into the eye of this patient and was able to confer some light sensitivity onto this patient that wasn't there before. - An amazing paper and discovery. I realize it was one patient, but it's such an important milestone. - Well, as you say, it's a very important milestone and the history of that is very deep. Almost 10 years earlier, Botond Rosca and I had published a paper in science in human retina, but X plants taken from cadavers from someone who had died, the living retina taken out, opsins put into this retinal tissue and showing that it worked, recording from the cells showing that in these human retinal neurons, that you could get light responses. But then, from that moment, almost 10 years of how clinical development goes, and this is a gene therapy and so you've got all the regulations and concerns and all that. It took almost 10 years to get to this point now where a living human being has a new functionality that wasn't there before. Now, that's incredibly inspiring, and it's a beautiful thing. I would say though, that the broader significance of optogenetics is really still understanding, because once you understand how the circuitry works and which cells actually matter, then any kind of treatment becomes more grounded and logical and specific and principled. And whether it's a medication, or a talk therapy or brain stimulation treatment with electrical or magnetic means, if you actually know what matters, [chuckles] that is incredibly powerful. And I think, not intended to disparage the beautiful retinal work and conferring vision on someone who couldn't see, of course that's wonderful, and that's direct what you might call direct optogenetics in patients. Indirect is everything that comes from understanding. Okay, we know these cells matter now, for this symptom. Well, how can we target those cells and help them work better in patients by any means? And I think that's the broader significance of optogenetics, clinically. - I know Botond well, and you and Botond share this incredible big vision, that I think only a clinician can really understand, being in close contact within the suffering of patients as a ultimate motivator of developing technologies, which makes me have to ask, did you decide to become a scientist to find cures for mental disease? - [chuckles] No, I didn't. It's a really important question to actually look back and see the steps that brought you to a particular place. And that was not what brought me initially to science and it's okay I think, to embrace [chuckles] the twists and turns that life brings to you, but I was always interested in the brain. And so, that was something that for me started from a very early age. We talked about being introspective. I noticed very early on I had a deep love of poetry and stories, and I was a voracious reader, and I was amazed by how words could make me feel in particular ways. Even separate from their, of course, dictionary meanings, the rhythm, and how they work together, even separate from meaning. And I was stunned by poets that could use words in new ways that were even divorced from their meaning at all, and yet could still trigger specific emotions. And this was always fascinating to me. So, I wanted to understand that, and so I was interested and I became interested in the brain and I thought, well, I'm going to to have to study the human brain, because only human beings can describe what's going on inside enough. So in college, I began to steer myself toward medicine, with the idea of becoming a neurosurgeon. And so I came here to medical school, and did an MD PhD program, planning neurosurgery all the way through. The first rotation I did at the end of medical school, as you know, you do rotations, you go through different specialties, and some of these are required rotations, everybody has to do this summary elective where you can pick what you want to do. I elected to do the neurosurgery first, [chuckles] even before regular surgery. I was that sure I wanted to do it, and I loved it. I had a fantastic time. There was an amazing patient who had a thalamic damage, and there was a neglect syndrome where the patient was not able to be aware of something that was right in front of him- - Even though their vision was perfectly fine? - Even though their vision was perfectly fine, exactly. And I loved the operating room, I loved the rhythm of suturing and the precision of it, and I loved being able to help patients immediately, but then a required rotation was in psychiatry, which I was not looking forward to at all. And that completely reset my whole life, that experience in psychiatry. And it was at that moment that I saw this is first of all, the greatest need, the depth of suffering and the depth of the mystery together. And also it was, I almost feel a little guilty about this. It's so interesting too. Yes, we can help. Yes, there's need, but as a scientist, this is amazing, that someone's reality can be different from my own, with everything physically, as far as we can tell the same with the measures we have, and yet we've got a different reality. That is an amazing thing, and if we can understand that and help these people, that would be just more than anybody could ask for. And so that's how I ended up taking this path, just a required rotation in psychiatry. - It all started with poetry? - And it started with poetry. - Out of respect for poetry, are there any favorites that you spend time with on a regular basis? - I mean, the ones who got me down this path early on, I remember in childhood and high school, Borges had an immense influence on me. I studied Spanish all the way through and reading his work. He was a great writer. He wrote both in English and in Spanish and being able to appreciate his poetry both in English and in Spanish was a pretty amazing thing. Not many poets can do that. - You're bilingual? - I'm not, I wouldn't say. Now I became, at one point I was effectively fluent in Spanish, and I'm pretty good with medical Spanish still because we use Spanish all the time in the clinic here. I wouldn't claim full fluency, but it's something I can definitely use all the time. And that's been very helpful in the clinic. - Yeah, Borges is wonderful. As the son of an Argentine, I grew up hearing about it and I learned that Borges' favorite city was Geneva. So I spent time in Geneva only for that reason. It's also turns out [Karl laughs] to be an interesting city. - Yes. - So you developed methods to control neurons with these algae proteins using light? - Yeah. - In 2015, there was what I thought was a very nice article published in the New Yorker, describing your work and the current state of your work in the laboratory and the clinic, and an interaction with a patient. So this as I recall, a woman who was severely depressed, and you reported in that article some of the discussion with this patient, and then in real time, increased the activation of the so-called vagus nerve, this 10th cranial nerve that extends out of the skull and innervates many of the viscera and body. What is the potential for channelrhodopsins or related types of algae engineering to be used to manipulate the vagus? Because I believe in that instance, it wasn't channelopsin stimulation, it was electrical stimulation, right? Or to manipulate for instance, a very small localized region of the brain? Let me frame it a little bit differently in light of what we were talking about a couple minutes ago. My understanding is that if somebody has severe depression and they take any number of the available pharmaceutical agents that are out there, SSRI, serotonergic agents, increased dopamine, increased whatever, that sometimes they experience relief, but they're often serious side effects. Sometimes they don't experience relief, but as I understand it, channelopsins and their related technology, in principle, would allow you to turn on or off the specific regions of the brain that lead to the depressive symptoms, or maybe you turn up a happiness circuit, or a positive anticipation circuit. Where are we at now in terms of bringing this technology to the nervous system? And let's start with the body, and then move into the skull. - Yup. So starting with the body is a good example because it highlights the opportunity and how far we have to go. So let's take this example of vagus nerve stimulation. So the vagus nerve, it's the 10th cranial nerve. It comes from the brain, it goes down and innervates the heart and innervates the gut. And by innervate, I mean it sends little connections down to help guide what happens in these organs in the abdomen and chest. It also collects information back, and there's information coming back from all those organs that also go through this vagus nerve, the 10th cranial nerve, back to the brain. And so this is somewhat of a super highway to the brain, and it was the idea. And maybe the idea is maybe we could put a little cuff, a little electrical device around the vagus nerve itself, and maybe have just like a pacemaker battery, have a little power source here under the clavicle, everything under the skin, and have a little cuff and drive signals, and maybe they'll get back to the brain. So a way of getting into the brain without putting something physical into the brain. - And why the vagus? I mean, it's there and it's accessible- - That's the reason. - [chuckles] That's the reason? - [chuckles] That's the reason, yes. - Really? - Yeah. - You're not kidding? - [Karl] I'm not kidding. - So stimulating the vagus to treat depression, simply because it's accessible. - It started actually as an epilepsy treatment and it can help with epilepsy, but yes, it's simple. - God, you got to love medicine. As a scientist, this is where I get to chuckle and you say, I'm in the field of medicine from that perspective. From the perspective of a scientist and outsider, the field of medicine is a field that goes in and tickles pathways because they're there. I don't know what to say. It's a little shocking. - Yeah. And at least in my laboratory, I always say you never do an experiment because you can, you do an experiment to test a specific hypothesis. - Yeah. Yeah. I mean, there are stories people tell so that the vagus nerve lands on a particular spot on the brain called the solitary tract nucleus, which is just one snaps away from the serotonin and dopamine and the norepinephrine- - So there's a link to chemical systems in the brain- that make an irrational choice? - Yes. It's not irrational, but I can tell you that even if that were not true, the same thing would have been tried. [Andrew laughs] - You guys would have done it anyway. - Because it's accessible. Yeah. - [Andrew] I see. Okay. - And why? Well, it's again, not to disparage what's been happening in this branch of medicine. There's immense suffering, many treatments don't work, and we try things. And this is how so many advances in medicine happen. When think about kidney dialysis which has kept many people alive, that was just started by someone saying, "Hey, let's try this. Maybe there's something building up in the blood and maybe we can dialyze something and help them." Yeah, it worked. And it was just sort of a test pilot mentality. We can access the blood, let's run it across a dialysis membrane, put it back in the body, oh my God, that actually works. And sometimes you do need that test pilot mentality, of course, to do it in a rigorous, safe, controlled way- - Sure. - which is what we do. And so, anyway, that's how we ended up, but still with the vagus nerve stimulation, okay, so what is it? Does it work? It has, it's FDA approved for depression, this vagus nerve stimulation, but on a population level, if you average across all people, the effect sizes are pretty small. Some patients it has an amazing effect in, but some patients it doesn't work at all, and average across everybody, the effect size is pretty small. - How do you think it's working when it does work? Is it triggering the activation of neurons that release more serotonin or dopamine? - It could be, but I would say we don't have evidence for that and so I just don't know. But what is clear, is that it's dose-limited in how high and strongly we can stimulate and why, it's because it's an electrode, and it's stimulating everything nearby. And when you turn on the vagus nerve stimulator, the patient's voice becomes strangulated and hoarse, they can have trouble swallowing, they can have trouble speaking for sure, even some trouble breathing, because everything in the neck, every electrically responsive cell and projection in the neck is being affected by this electrode. And so you can go up just so far with the intensity, and then you have to stop. So, to your initial question, could a more precise stimulation method like optogenetics help in the setting? In principle, it could, because if you would target the light sensitivity to just the right kind of cell, let's say cell X that goes from point A to point B that you know, causes symptom relief of a particular kind, then you're in business. You can have that be the only cell that's light sensitive. You're not going to affect any of the other cells, the larynx and the pharynx and the projections passing through. So that's the hope, that's the opportunity. The problem, is that we don't yet have that level of specific knowledge. We don't know, okay, it's the cells starting at point A going to point B, that relieves this particular symptom. - We want to fix this key on the piano? - Yeah. - And then I see two other steps that are required. One is to get the channelopsin gene into the cell. In the case of Botond Rosca and colleagues rescuing vision in this patient, they did that by an injection of a virus that doesn't damage the neurons. The virus itself is fairly innocuous, but carries a cargo, and it's a one-time injection, the cells express, and then they used light to stimulate. So, let's say I'm depressed, which I don't think I am, although now sitting in front of a psychiatrist, [Karl laughs] you probably can see signs that maybe I am or maybe I'm not, but let's say we put channelopsin into a specific branch of the vagus that we understand is responsible for mood, how are we going to get it in there? And, then how are we going to deliver the light? 'Cause we're not talking about sunlight or standing in front of a light bulb necessarily, what are the mechanisms for the body? - Yeah. So we had to solve exactly these questions you're saying. How do you get the light in? How do you get the gene in, in a potent and robust and safe way? And that's now solved, and that's not a challenge. So there are very safe, well-tolerated gene delivery mechanisms that are called adeno-associated viruses, AAVs, and these are things that are associated with the common cold. They themselves don't cause any symptoms. They've been engineered, and there's been a broad community of viral engineering that's been going on for decades making these safer, well-tolerated, and so on. We can put the channelrhodopsin gene into these viral vectors that deliver the gene and we can have little bits of additional DNA that govern expression only in one kind of cell, but not another. These are called promoters and enhancers, all genetic tricks built up by a very broad community of great scientists over the decades. We can put these different bits of DNA, package them into this AAV, this little virus, and that can be then injected into a particular part of the body, and sticking with this vagus nerve example, we know that there are particular clumps of neurons. There's one called the nodose ganglion that has a clump of cells related to the vagus nerve, and you could for example, target a little injection into that ganglion- - Would that be an outpatient procedure? - Yep. Yep. - So you come in in the morning, get your injection, maybe walk out a few hours later? - Yeah. That's right. And so that's the gene, then the light delivery, this is also something that we've worked out. We've worked on making very, very light-sensitive opsins. One challenge, and Botond would be the first to state this in fact, [chuckles] in solving this problem for the patient, he had to build goggles that created much brighter light than the normal ambient light delivery, because as I mentioned earlier, you have to pack a lot of these channelrhodopsins in, they don't have much current. You have to really make sure that you've got a tense enough light to activate enough of them to cause a stimulation- - And it has to be the right wavelength, right? - It has to be the right wavelength- - And going back to your example of the algae moving toward or away the light, it has to be tuned just right. So I'm imagining in my mind as a non-engineer, I know you're [chuckles] also a bioengineer, I'm imagining a little tiny blue light-emitting object, that's a little bigger than a clump of cells, or maybe about the size of a clump of cells. And for those that don't know, your credit card is about 200 microns thick on the side, and a micron is a thousandths of a millimeter, and so we're talking about a little tiny stamp that's basically half a millimeter in size all around. Each edge, half a millimeter in size. I can imagine that being put under my skin, and then I would what, I'd hit an app on my phone, and I'd say, "Dr. Deisseroth, I'm not feeling great today. Can I increase the stimulation?" And you'd say, "Go for it." And then I'd ramp it up. Is that how it would go? - I mean, that's effectively what we already do with the vagus nerve stimulation. The doctor in this case, and I have this in some of my patients in the clinic, I do vagus nerve stimulation. I talk to them, I say, "How are you?" I go through the symptoms, I use the psychiatric interview to elicit their internal states, and then I have a radio frequency controller that I can dial in- - Right there in real time? - Right there in real time. - You're holding the remote control essentially to their brain, although it's remote controlled? - Yeah, through a couple of steps, but yeah. And I can turn up the frequency, I can turn up the intensity, all with the radio frequency and control, and then it's reprogrammed or redosed, and then the patient can then leave at this altered dose. - So this is happening now? - This is happening right now, electrically. - You do this routinely? - I do it routinely in my clinic, electrically, yeah. - And you're getting the verbal content, which as you described earlier, is the indication of how well something is working in real time? - Yes. - So this is what, maybe you could just describe a little bit of the interaction with that particular patient or another patient, what's a typical arc of narrative as you go from no stimulation to increased stimulation? - In most patients, the actual therapeutic effects, the benefits actually take many days to weeks, and so what I'm mostly focusing on in the office in real time, is making sure I'm in a safe, low side effect regime. And so first I talk to the patient who has been on a particular dose of the stimulation for weeks or longer, and I talk about symptoms, how were things over the past month? How was your hope? How was your energy level? Sleep? What is your mood? And then we talk with the patient and we decide, well, this is not yet where we'd like to be. And so then, I can turn up the intensity of the stimulation in real time in the office. In most patients, I don't expect an immediate mood change. What I do, is I increase the dose until a next level up, while asking the patient for side effects. Can you still breathe? Okay. Can you still swallow? Okay. And I can hear their voice as well. And I can get a sense- - And you're looking at their face? - And I'm looking at their face. - Yeah. - And so I can get a sense, am I still on a safe side effect regime? And then, I stop at a particular point that looks safe, and then the patient goes home, comes back a month later, and I get the report on how things were over that month. - I asked if you're looking at their face, 'cause in your book, you describe the incredible complexity of social interactions. And at one point, you describe the incredible amount of information that the eyes inform about the brain and the context of somebody's inner experience, whether depressed or happy or otherwise. - Yeah. - I want to make sure that we get back to how to maneuver and manipulate the nervous system for the sake of mental health. But, what are you looking for? So as a vision scientist, I think pupils dilating is a sign of arousal, but that could be a positive arousal, positive valence, like excitement, or it could be terror. - Yeah. - You're going to get the same dilation of the pupils. And I'm always reminding people that these two little goodies are two pieces of brain, basically, [Karl chuckles] they're just outside the cranial vault. So they're not unlike the vagus in that sense, but they're more of a report than a control knob, although I'd like to think they could be used as control knobs too. So, without putting you on the spot, again, to diagnose me, [Karl laughs] that's something I would never ask you to do [Karl laughing] with the cameras rolling, but what are you looking for that the patient might not be aware of? In other words, can you see depression in somebody's eyes? And if you know a patient or if you don't, can you see it in their body posture when they walk in? Realizing of course, that a trained psychiatrist like yourself, develops an intuitive sense that's aggregating lots of different features of a patient, but what about the eyes? What's going on there? - Yeah. The eyes are incredibly rich in information. And as you alluded to though, it's not as if any one measurable conveys all the information you need. It's what an engineer would say, joint statistics. It's many things all at once, whether they're in synchrony or out of synchrony, that actually turns out to matter. And the eye contact question, we all know eye contact is incredibly important. You don't feel you've connected with somebody, unless there's eye contact, but eye contact can go awry too. It can be too intense, or it can be mistimed, or if there's someone with autism, it can be barely there at all. And this is one of the most striking symptoms of autism, is the avoidance of eye contact, almost as if it's a harmful quantity. And so there's an immense amount of information you get from the eyes, but it's the pairing of what's going on in the eyes, with everything else going on, the body language, the verbal content of what's coming out. All that together is the art of psychiatry and social interaction. But sometimes you don't have the eye contact. And this is an amazing thing and I do talk about this in the book as well. In many cases in psychiatry, sometimes it's over the phone that you have to make key decisions. And as I recall, vividly being as a resident, very often you have to take these phone calls from people who are not in the hospital, people you can't see, you can't see their eyes, you can't see their body or anything about them, just the sound of their voice. And you can ask them questions, and you have to make, in some cases, life or death decisions. Is this person truly suicidal? Something like that, as it comes up all the time. And so I developed over the course of training, and I think all psychiatrists do this, is you develop a way that data stream you have, whether it's the eyes or whether it's just the sound of a voice coming over the phone, you learn to hone in on that data stream you have and focus on it and identify changes and it's quite amazing. I found that you can actually... If you know a patient, you can detect very precise changes in mood, just from the sound of the voice. And you can have a realization that oh, this patient's depression has improved by about half, just by the tone of their voice. And same with eyes, with enough practice, you can get enough information from a single data stream to give you some information, but when you do have the whole picture of that, of course, is best. - So, so many theories out there about excessive blinking and lying, lack of blinking and sociopathy. I like to remind people that people have varying degrees of lubrication of the eyes, [Karl laughs] which also influence the frequency of blinking and presumably have nothing to do with whether or not what they're saying is true or not. But incredible, nonetheless, that the eyes are a portal to overall arousal state. I'm fascinated by the effects of light on circadian biology and just overall desire to be awake or asleep, et cetera. So the eyes are on the outside of the cranial vault. The vagus is outside the cranial vault, obviously. What about the goodies in here? Parkinson's, we know at least one of the major sites of degeneration and failure that lead to those symptoms. I can name off any number of other things. In your book, you talk about the beautiful work done with optogenetics of active versus passive coping, that there are areas of the brain like the habenula that when active, make animals and presumably people, passive and unwilling, or uninterested in fighting back against pressures of life, whereas another region, the raphe, you stimulate that, and they actively cope. They get their grit going, and they are able to lean into life. So, how does one get to those structures in a focused way? And what does the next two to five, to 10 years look like? - Well, this is the promise on that, and it is on a timescale that I think things may start to play out. The specificity of optogenetics is really only useful if you have some idea of how to use that specificity. And actually, it's a frustrating aspect of psychiatry that in many cases, the most effective treatments we have, have the least specificity, electroconvulsive therapy being a great example, where you're causing a brainwide- - Which looks barbaric, but as you mentioned is effective. - I mean, it is. These days, it's much more clinically safe- - It doesn't look like one fluid there last seen in the lab [indistinct] - No it doesn't. Now it's a very clinically safe and stable procedure, but I would say yeah, it's got this almost medieval lack of specificity, even if the procedure is well-controlled and clinically safe and stable, and it's not very specific. You're causing a brainwide seizure. How could you be less specific than that? - And we don't know the source of the relief. - [Karl] We don't know- - Presumably it's a dump of neuromodulators like dopamine and serotonin, but we don't really know- - There certainly is a dump of neuromodulators. We don't know that that's the cause for the relief. And likewise with medications, this is an awesome and interesting thing. Some of the most effective antidepressants, some of the most effective anti-psychotics are the ones that have the most side effects and there are many examples of this. For example, the most effective anti-psychotic is something called clozapine, which unquestionably has the most side effects. It has terrible, terrible side effects. - The D4 antagonist? - It has basically every receptor. [laughs] - Does it really? - Yeah. - Interesting. - Yeah, it has prominent serotonin, prominent muscarinic, certainly acts on dopamine receptors, but it causes blood cell counts change- [laughs] - How do people feel? So if I were schizophrenic and I was getting auditory hallucinations, et cetera, and I took clozapine, what could I expect to feel? - Well, so you would notice side effects, and you would notice resolution of symptoms both and- - So the voices would go away? - Yeah. - But in a good situation, the voices would go away? - That's right. - But I would feel not good in my body? - You might have dizziness, you might have drooling, you might have any number of physical sensations that would be due to these off target effects, the medication acting on these other receptors- - I'm certainly not suggesting this, but what if somebody without schizophrenia took clozapine? - They'd have the same side effects presumably, yeah. And so it would not be something that I would recommend. - Yeah. Do psychiatrists take the drugs that they prescribe? [Karl laughs] I just finished for the third time, Oliver Sacks' autobiography which is marvelous and I highly recommend to people. He certainly took a lot of drugs, not as part of his professional role, but just out of curiosity, what is the interest or kind of role of drugs in the field of psychiatry? Because I would imagine for a group of very curious introspective people who are making recommendations about what to take, there could actually be some benefit for understanding what the experience of those drugs was like for their patients. - I think that's true. And I will say that probably many or most psychiatrists have sampled the number of these for exactly the reason that you're saying is to understand better and to help treat their patients better. And I've spoken to people who have found this very helpful to know, okay, this sleep disruption caused by this medication or the libido disruption caused by this other medication. Wow, that is a big effect. And it really helps with empathy for the patients to understand. - I'm not suggesting that physicians or anybody experiment with drugs, but I am relieved to hear that, because I think that when you're talking about accessing somebody's mind and their basic physiology, as you've mentioned, relate to appetite, libido and sleep, really, one is acting as a mechanic of the person's whole experience. They walk out of the office and they have a life experience that extends beyond the script. - Yeah. And so at the same time though, you can't let that completely guide your clinical decisions, because as I mentioned, some of these medications that have the most side effects, they are also the most effective and clozapine is a great example. That will work in patients where nothing else works. And believe me, we don't take the step of clozapine prescription lightly, because of all these side effects. You have to come in for a weekly blood cell, or every few weeks of blood cell check, to make sure that the blood counts are not off for example, but there are patients where no other medication works for the schizophrenia and clozapine works amazingly well- - That's marvelous. - And so we do it, even though there are the side effects. And so then this comes back to your question, what if we had better and better specificity? Well, only if we know exactly what we're doing is the point. And so because as we become more refined, we'd better be right about where we we're refining to.. - And do you imagine a day where it will be a single, maybe even outpatient neurosurgery, would go in through the skull or the back of the ear, deliver a small viral injection of one of these adenoviruses, a little sticker of light-emitting diode, deep in the brain, is that how you envision this someday? - That certainly could happen. What I actually prefer as a vision is still medications, because those are minimally invasive. If we knew what we were doing, we could make them more specific, have fewer side effects, but optogenetics, that will arm us with true causal understanding. And so we'll know, and we're already moving rapidly toward this point, we'll know okay, this symptom, loss of pleasure in life that we call anhedonia, or the loss of motivation or energy to overcome challenges, active coping, these are largely subserved, largely controlled by this circuit or that circuit or the cell that inhabits this other circuit. - And we will know that because of the work done with channelopsins? - Exactly. - Yeah. I agree. - In ways that we never could have the confidence otherwise. And so we'll know that this is the circuit that underlies the symptom or its resolution. And then we'll get to understand these cells very deeply, okay, these cells that are causal, that do matter, who are they? What's their wiring? What are the proteins that they make? What are the little things that are on the surface of the cell that could be receptors for specific medications or combinations of receptors that would give us the specificity we need? And then, armed with that causal and precise and rigorous knowledge, then you can imagine medication development becoming totally different, no longer serendipitous, but truly grounded in causality. - I see. So using channelopsins as a way to probe the circuitry and figure out the sites that are disrupted, what patterns of activity are required? And then, by understanding the constituents of those cells, like what they express and what they make, then developing drugs that could target those cells, not necessarily putting light-inducing diodes into the brain, or walking around with wire packs attached to our skull or something like that. - [Karl] Right. Exactly. - That's fantastic. And I realized no one has a crystal ball, but what do you think the arc of that is? Meaning, are we going to see that in a year? In two years? Three years? Let me reframe that. How soon will a pill-based treatment for a psychiatric disease be available, that targets a specific set of cells that we know are important because of the work done with channelopsins? - I think that in some ways it's already happening at the level of individual patients- - Here at Stanford? - Yeah. Yup. And more broadly in terms of new drugs, new multi-centered clinical trials that will play out over the next few years. And these could be drugs that are already safe and approved for other purposes, but we might say okay, now we know that this medication, based on what we know from causal optogenetics, this could be useful for this other purpose, this psychiatric symptom. And so the path to helping patients could be relatively swift. - That's very exciting. What are your thoughts about brain machine interface and Neuralink always comes up, although I do want to point out a tremendous respect for the folks at Neuralink including someone who came up through my lab, is now there as a neurosurgeon, but the brain machine interface is something that's been happening for a long time now, some of the best work, among the best work being done here at Stanford and elsewhere too of course, is what you just described compatible with or different than brain machine interface, meaning devices, little probes are going to stimulate different patterns of activity and ensembles of neurons? And what are your general thoughts about brain machine interfaces going forward? - I mean, first of all, it's an amazing scientific discovery approach, as you mentioned, we and others here at Stanford are using electrodes, collecting information from tens of thousands of neurons- - In humans, I should add. Yeah. [chuckles] - And even, yes, it is quite even separate from the Neuralink work as you point out, many people have been doing this in humans, as well as in non-human primates. And this is pretty powerful, it's important. This will let us understand what's going on in the brain, in psychiatric disease and neurological disease, and will give us ideas for treatment. It is, of course still invasive. You still are talking about putting a device into the brain. And that has to be treated as a situation that has some risks, and a step that has to be taken carefully. I see that as something that will be part of psychiatry in the long run, already with deep brain stimulation approaches, we can help people with psychiatric disorders. And that's putting just a single electrode, not even a complex closed loop system where you're both playing in and getting information back, even just a single stimulation electrode in the brain can help people with OCD, for example, quite powerfully. And that will become much more powerful when we get to a true brain machine interface, collecting information back, stimulating only when you need to. If we could identify a pathological activity pattern, a particular, almost like the prodrome or the early stage of a seizure, maybe there are events that happened leading up to on some timescale, a psychiatric symptom that we could intervene in a closed loop way to detect what's happening, what's starting to go wrong, feed that back to the brain stimulation electrode, have it be in that way more efficient and more principled. I think it's great. It's something that of course will be grounded again and causal understanding, we'll need to know, what is that pathological pattern that we're detecting? And we need to know that it matters. And so again, that's where optogenetics is helping us. It's helping us know, okay, this pattern of activity in these cells and these circuits, this does mean that there's a particular kind of symptom that's happening. But armed with that knowledge, absolutely, even the simple closed loop device detect and stimulate is going to be part of psychiatry in the future. And then of course, as you get to more cells, more connections, the ability that we have to help people will become more powerful. - One of the questions I get asked a lot is about ADHD and attention deficit of various kinds. I have a hunch, that one reason I get asked so often is that people are feeling really distracted and challenged in funneling their attention and their behavior. And there are number of reasons for that, of course, but what is true ADHD, and what does it look like? What can be done for it? And what if any role for channelopsins or these downstream technologies that you're developing, what do they offer for people that suffer from ADHD or have a family member that suffers from ADHD? - This is a pretty interesting branch of psychiatry. There's no question that people have been helped by the treatments, there's active debate over what fraction of people who have these symptoms can or should be treated? - This is typically Adderall or stimulants of some kind? - Yeah, for example the stimulants, that's right. So ADHD as its name suggests, it has symptoms of, it can have either a hyperactive state or an inattentive state, and those can be completely separate from each other. You could have a patient who effectively is not hyperactive at all, but can remain focused on what's going on around them- - So the body can be still, but their mind is darting around? - That's right. - Or they can be very hyperactive with their body. - Yeah, it happens both ways. - Probably rarely is somebody hyperactive with their body but their mind is still, [Karl laughs] although I have to say, and this is a benevolent shout out to Botond Rosca, Botond has an incredibly sharp and focused mind. - Yeah. - And his hand movements [Karl laughs] are extremely exact also, so I do sometimes wonder, whether or not our body movements and our head movements, whether or not they're coordinated or not is a readout of how directed our attention is. - I noticed, I have to think complex, abstract thoughts. I noticed I have to be very still. So my body has to be almost completely on moving for me to think very abstractly and deeply. Other people are different. Some people, when they're running, they get their best thoughts. I can't even imagine that. My brain does not work that way at all. I have to be totally motionless, [laughs] which is kind of interesting. - How do you go about that? - I sit much like this, I try to have time in each day where I'm literally sitting almost in this position, but without distraction and thinking, and so it's almost meditative in some ways, except it's not true meditation, but I am thinking, well, I'm not moving- - You're trying to structure your thoughts in that time? - Yeah. - Interesting. - Yeah. So, but everybody, as you say is very different. And so with ADHD, the key thing is we want to make sure that this is present across different domains of life, school and home, to show that it really is a pervasive pattern, and not something specific to the teacher or the home situation or something. And then you can help patients. It's interesting that ADHD is one of those disorders where people are trying to work on quantitative EEG-based diagnoses, and so there's some progress toward making a diagnosis looking at particular, externally detectable brainwave rhythm- - So skullcap with some electrodes that don't penetrate the skull? - That's right. - And this can be done in an hour or two-hour session? - Yeah, that's right. - It has to be done in a clinic, right? - Yeah, in the clinic, right, and you have to have the right recording apparatus and so on, but in principle, increase in confidence comes in exactly which measurements one could even imagine moving toward home tests, but we're not there yet. - Amazing. I think one of the reasons I get asked about it so much is a lot of people wonder if they have ADHD. Do you think that some of the lifestyle factors that inhabit us all these days, could induce a subclinical or a clinical-like ADHD? I look at people's phone use including my own, and I don't think of it like addiction, it looks to me and feels to me more like OCD. And I'll come clean here by saying when I was younger, when I was a kid, I had a grunting tic. I used to hide it. I actually used to hide in the closet, 'cause my dad would make me stop. And I couldn't feel any relief of my mind until I [grunts] would do this. And actually now, if I get very tired, if I've been pushing long hours, it'll come back. - Interesting. - I was not treated for it, but I will confess that I've had the experience of, I always liked sports where I involved a lot of impact, fortunately not football, because I went to a high school where the football team was terrible. Maybe that would have avoided more impact, [Karl laughs] but things like skateboarding, boxing, they bring relief. I feel clarity after a head hit, which I avoid, [Karl laughs] but I used to say that's the only time I feel truly clear for a while. And then eventually it dissipated. By about age 16, 17, it just disappeared. So I have great empathy for those that feel like there's something contained in them that won't allow them to focus on what they want to focus on. And these days, with the phone and all these email, et cetera, I wonder and I empathize a bit when I hear people saying like, "I think I might have ADHD or ADD". Do you think it's possible that our behaviors and our interaction with the sensory world, which is really what phones and email really are, could induce ADD or reactivate it? - This is a great question. I think about it a lot, and you mentioned this tic-like behavior in yourself, it's very common that people who have tics have this building up of something that can only be relieved by executing the tic which can be a motor movement or a vocalization or even a thought. And people do, I think these days, do have this. If they haven't checked their phone in a while, they do have a buildup and buildup and buildup until they can check it and relieve it. And there's some similarities, there is a little reward that comes with the checking. But the key question in all of psychiatry, what we do is we don't diagnose something unless it's disrupting what we call social or occupational functioning. Like you could have any number of symptoms, but literally every psychiatric diagnosis requires that it has to be disrupting someone's social or occupational functioning. And these days, checking your phone is pretty adaptive. That pretty much helps your social and occupational functioning. And so we can't make [chuckles] it a psychiatric diagnosis. - Interesting. - At least in the world of today. - Yeah, opting out of communication now, makes you in some ways less adaptive, though I would point to you as an example of somebody who is quite good at managing his interactions, at least from the outsider perspective, I do want to ask you a little bit about you. And first of all, and I realize this is only a partial list, but you're a clinician, you see patients, you run a big laboratory, how many people are in your laboratory now? That's a huge laboratory. From experience, I can say that's an enormous laboratory. You have a family of five children, and you're happily married to a wonderful colleague of ours as well, who does incredible work. How do you organize at a kind of conceptual level, the day and the week? And I should say, what stress mitigation practices if any, do you incorporate? I've received emails from you at three in the morning. I sometimes send emails at three in the morning, but that's when I wake up, maybe I'm depressed, but I go back to sleep. So, maybe just describe the arc of the blocks of the day, not hour by hour, necessarily the details of what are in those blocks, but how do you conceptualize the day? How do you conceptualize the week? And how do you feel about how that's lined up with your larger goals of making sure these five young people flourish? Which I hear they are, but how do you go about this, what for most people would just be an overwhelming set of items? - Well, of course sometimes it's just take it day by day, and so I don't claim- - So you bring the horizon into the unit of the day? - I do, I do. The unit is the day, that's right. And I try to have in each day, as I mentioned earlier, at least an hour of time where I can think, and it can be when kids are napping, actually, because while driving I can do that too, because I'm sitting still, [clears throat] but that's the one thing I try to preserve. When I was writing the book, I adapted that time to be my writing time, but it wasn't enough, so I had to add in a new block of time which was sort of midnight to 2:00 AM, writing time. [chuckles] And carving out these, even small protected times are very important. Of course, obligations will expand to fill the time available and you have to be disciplined. At least I found I had to be disciplined in truly protecting those times where one can think. - So that means no phone? - That means no phone, no checking of the phone. When I was writing the book, there's a focus mode on the MacBook which kind of rules the border, and you just have your documents and it's very pure, and you don't have the temptation of distraction. - I'm a big believer in because the vision and the eyes play such a prominent role in directing our cognition, something you talk about in the book, really beautifully, and with a lot of depth and rigor, using visual tools to harness one's complete mental attention. When you do this practice of sitting and just thinking, sitting still and thinking, you said your eyes are open. Are you hearing your own verbal voice, although in your head? - Yes. - So you're actually in conversation with yourself? - Yes. And hearing literally, I mean, not quite literally, I don't actually hear information, but I'm hearing words, and so I discovered this about myself. Other people, I think may operate differently, but I'm extremely verbal in how I think. That's how all my reasoning is done. It's with sentences and [chuckles] construction of almost equations with words. - Complete sentences? - Complete sentences or complete-ish anyway, mostly complete, and when writing the book, everything about the writing, every sentence was always played out in my mind, listening for rhythm and timing, and I would obsess over exact placement of words to get the right rhythm of the spoken sentence in my mind. - I don't mean to interrupt your flow, but when you do that, and having experienced this process a bit, although differently, do you experience any kind of welling up of anxiety when you're hitting the friction points? And if so, do you have tools or ways that you quell that anxiety in real time? 'Cause what we're really talking about here is your mind. But what we're really talking about is this process of converting the activity of neurons, into something physically concrete in the world. And these intermediate steps are so mysterious to everybody. We hear, "Just write the book", "Just do it", whatever that means. In fact, statements like that to me are kind of empty and meaningless, but when you hear your voice and you're trying to find the correct word and you keep hitting, it doesn't sound quite right, what is the experience in your body? - Yeah, when it's not right, it's definitely evasive, it doesn't feel good, but there's also a hope because I know I can solve it too, and it's almost like you're almost there. There's a path that you know is there, you don't quite see it, but it's there. And I keep that in mind, and so there's this propulsive force forward because I know that the solution is there. And that said, there were single words that I would spend days on, because I was just not happy until I got it right. And there were some things that I never quite got perfect, and so I left out of the book entirely because it was so close, but not quite there. And I was like, no, I can't put that in. - Everything you just said is entirely consistent with my experience of you, [both laughing] and the way you go about everything. I have to ask, are your kids writers? Do they like books and words and poetry? I know one of your children is going on to a career in medicine and science. - Yeah. They're each different which is amazing, yet they all, I think do have some appreciation or a lot of appreciation for reading, but some are very musical. Two of the five are extremely musical, very, very talented with guitar and singing and vocal, impressions, it's just astonishing. And some of them are great with drawing and artistry and some are very physical and vigorous and are never happy except when leaping about. And so, it's just amazing how different they are, honestly. But I think there is a shared appreciation for language. - Do you think that one can train their mind in using these practices? I really like your description of the staying physically still and learning to grapple with those challenges. It's something that, especially in laboratory science, we aren't really trained to do. Like many professions we're taught to come in and just get into motion, and I found that very relaxing as someone who probably has an underlying tic [Karl chuckles] or something like that, it felt great to be in motion. One of the hardest things about becoming a university professor and running a lab, was that I no longer working with my hands. And it felt like some big important part of my life had been amputated. But what sorts of practices do you incorporate there? And do you think people can learn to get better at focusing through a dedicated practice of the sort that you described? - I remember the rhythms of physical work in the laboratory very well. My work these days as the laboratory leader, my job has returned mostly to words now, again. And so it's kind of coming full circle. So it's a different mode. I think you just have to embrace the different stages of life, come with the different modes, but you can definitely train yourself for each mode. I loved, as I mentioned, the rhythm of sewing and suturing and surgery, and I worked really hard on that and became good at it. And now, I never do it, but it's what's the next challenge. There's all the various experimental techniques the dissections of the brain, I can't tell you how many thousands of brain dissections I've done in my life, and now I don't do them at all. [Karl laughs] - And then you developed a method so that we don't have to dissect brains. - That's right. [chuckles] - As you mentioned there, maybe tell us for a moment about clarity, and for people who will probably never set foot into a laboratory, what an incredible, yet another incredible discovery and development clarity is, and why it helps us understand how the brain is structured. - Yeah. So this is a different technology also developed in my lab here, and it's part of a broader approach that we call hydrogel-tissue chemistry. And what this is, is it's building a gel, like a clear jello-like substance from within all the cells of a tissue or even an animal, all at once. So you're effectively building a gel inside all the cells at once. Now, that's an odd thing to do. Why do we do it? Well, we do it to transform the tissue into a more tractable accessible object. And the reason that works is having built this gel, this new infrastructure inside the tissue, we can then use chemical tricks, and we can link the molecules we care about, like proteins or RNAs which are the things, as you know, right before they become proteins, we can link them, physically anchor them to this gel, which is a scaffold basically, it's an interlocking network of polymers. We can link all these interesting molecules in place, lock them in where they were initially in the tissue, in the cell, in all the cells. And then we can remove very vigorously, everything we don't care about that's blocking our light, that's blocking our molecules, coming in to exchange information with the tissue. We can get rid of everything else, like the lipids, the fats, we can effectively use detergents to get them all out, and then we can see in all the things that were absorbing or scattering light are gone, you can have a brain that's completely transparent, and yet, all the interesting molecules are still locked into place there, at the cellular and sub cellular level. And so this is hydrogel-tissue chemistry. The first form we described was called clarity. We use that quite a bit still, but there are many variants now, that we and others have developed on this basic concept of building this gel within the tissue and anchoring molecules into place. - Literally glass-clear brains. I've done this, I've taken a brain cleared with this method, and looked at somebody through it, [Karl laughing] and although you don't want to get it too close to your eye, you don't want to touch it to your own eye, and you can see direct all the way through it. - [Karl] Yeah. - That's incredible for it raises an important question, which is again, about the human brain, and as somebody who essentially started out in neuroanatomy and then got into other things, I always am bothered by the fact that we actually know very little about the microstructure of the human brain, compared to the brains of other organisms. - Yeah. - And in thinking about understanding the circuitry and the piano, so to speak and how to manipulate it in order to relieve suffering, one wonders, are the structures in these animal brains and how they behave, and active coping, passive coping, ADD, et cetera, those models, how well they translate to the human condition. Do you think it's fair to say that there are entire regions of the human brain that aren't just bigger, but that exist only in the brains of humans? Especially given that we have this speech, although I do wonder sometimes if animals report in to each other there. Maybe they have little psychiatric sessions with one another. - You know, I'm always careful to not assume we do things better. We certainly understand what we're doing better than we understand what animals are doing, and they certainly do things better than we do. That said, we do have amazing, wonderful brains and many structures that are very highly developed in our brains that are not nearly so developed in mice and fish for example. Now, that said, when I look at the big picture, what is the mammalian brain really doing? There are things that you would never have thought we could study in animals and laboratory mammals like mice, that it turns out you can, actually, and so I would never draw the line and say, here's something you can't study in mice, or here's something that has no parallel in mice. I would be very careful before making any statement like that. And a good example of that is we've been able to study just in the past year, come to an understanding of dissociation, and we had a paper that came out in late 2020, both mouse and human work, in which we got to the sort of the circuit basis for dissociation. Now, what is dissociation? A lot of people might not have experienced it, but it's actually very common. More than 70% of people who've been through trauma experience dissociation, it shows up in borderline personality, it shows up in PTSD. What it is, is a separation of the sense of self, from the body. So you can have someone who, it's not as if you're numb, you're not anesthetized. You can still know that something's happening to the body, but you just don't care, because you don't ascribe it to yourself, which is very interesting, right? How interesting is that? - The cells report narrative. - Yeah. Yeah. - In your book, you touch on this. And I will say is the most precise, and meaningful and eloquent description of what might be consciousness, this narrative toward the self or of the self, and where it might reside. So in dissociative conditions, people are feeling as kind of an absence of a merge between mind and body. - Right. - Is that one way to describe it? - That's right. - And as I recall, this paper involved an exploration of ketamine. - Ketamine was a big part of it. Yeah, that's right. And so ketamine is another one of those cases where people can experience dissociation. Ketamine or PCP, we call these the dissociative drugs. They cause it just like these other psychiatric conditions can cause it. But we were able to manifest this in mice, administering these dissociative agents in mice. We could make them still able to detect stimulus, but not care that it was happening. All the while we were recording the activity of individual cells in the brain to see what was going on, what was happening along with this dissociation, and then use optogenetics to see that it mattered to actually provide that pattern of activity and see, oh, that actually causes the dissociation. So we could do all that in mice, which who would've thought that you could study something like this in mice? And we were able to go back and forth with human work because here in our Stanford Comprehensive Epilepsy Center, there's a lot of what we call Stereo EEG Recording. Patients who come in and in the course of normal clinical care, they have electrodes recording in their brain to identify where the seizure is, so they can be candidates for removing a little patch of the brain that's causing the seizure. This has done for patients who medications are not helping their seizure disorder. And there was a patient who had a dissociative state before every seizure, so this was a human being who was really dissociating, who could tell us literally as it was happening. And we could see this pattern, the same pattern that was happening in the mice, in the same patch of the brain, we could see that happening in the human being at exactly the right time, in the same patch of the brain that's homologous across these immense evolutionary distances. And we knew that it mattered to both the mouse and human because in the human we could cause it to happen. - I just want to underscore the power of optogenetics and the ability to not just remove a particular experience or behavior by lesioning or destroying, but then to go back and actually activate same structure or group of structures and see the emergences. So essentially, these days you hear a lot about gain of function research in the context of viral manipulation, but gain of function is something that we do in the laboratory and you do in patients, to both take away something and put it back, which gives you causality. - That's right. Yeah, and exactly. And so with optogenetics, we were able to provide in animals without being on any ketamine or any drug and we could cause the dissociative state by playing in a precise pattern of activity. And who would have thought you could do that? But that was a combined mouse and human paper. Likewise, we've been able to play in visual sensations into the brains of mice, and by observing which cells in the visual part of the brain, visual cortex, are naturally responsive to for example, vertical bars, instead of horizontal bars in the visual world, we could see which cells were normally reporting on vertical bars, and then we could use optogenetics to come and play in activity just to those cells. - So these animals are not viewing anything? - Not viewing anything at all. And we could activate just the vertical bar cells, and not only did the animal act as if it was seeing a vertical bar, behaviorally, it was trained to do a particular thing if it saw a vertical bar, and it did that, just as if it was seeing something visually. But everything in the brain that we were recording to the internal representation of this external world was naturalistic too. It looked like the brain was seeing something visual. So that's gain of function too, you know, playing in, providing a complex sensation or percept that wasn't there before. And we can do that across species. So, and of course mice are social, and they do amazing acts of information processing and I try not to disparage our cousins too much. - They certainly have helped the field of neuroscience and medicine I should mention, and I know that people have various sensitivities about animal research, but the work that's been carried out in mice has been absolutely vital and instructional for treatment of human disease. - That's right. - Since we talked about dissociation and dissociative states rather and ketamine, I'd love your thoughts on psychedelic medicine. You know, I sort of half joke having grown up in this area in Northern California when it was much more counter-culture than it is now, that many of the things that we're hearing about now, at least from my read of the history books, happened before. There was a movement aimed at taking the very same compounds essentially, putting them into patients or people who were obviously using them recreationally, but putting them into patients, and seeing tremendous positive effects, but also tremendous examples of induced psychiatric illness. In other words, many people lost their minds as a consequence of overuse of psychedelics. I'll probably lose a few people out there, but I do want to talk about, what is the state of these compounds? And I realize it's a huge category of compounds, but LSD and psilocybin, as I understand trigger activation of particular serotonin receptor mechanisms, may or may not lead to more widespread activation of the brain that one wouldn't see otherwise. But when you look at the clinical and experimental literature, what is your sort of top contour sense of how effective these tools are going to be for treating depression? And then if we have the time, we could talk about trauma and MDMA and some of that work. - Well, you're right to highlight both the opportunity and the parallel that is there. And of course we want to help patients and of course we want to explore anything that might be helpful, but we want to do it in a safe and rigorous way. But I do think we should explore these avenues. These are agents that alter reality and alter the experience of reality I should say, in relatively precise ways. They do have problems, they can be addictive, they can cause lasting change that is not desirable, but we have to see these as opportunities. We have to first of all, study in the laboratory, and I'm doing this here. You know we have [chuckles] big... We have safes with many interesting psychedelics that are all very carefully regulated. We get inspections from the DEA and so on. - If anyone's hoping to find these labs, [Karl laughing] they exist in outer space, so you need to be on board one of the SpaceX missions in order to access them. So don't try and come find them. - No, that's exactly true. Yes. And we're doing exactly this. We're saying this is an incredible opportunity. If we could understand how the perception of reality is altered, we could be creating new kinds of intervention that don't have the risks and the problems of causing lasting change or addiction. Now, that said, even as these medications exist now, as you know, there's an impulse to use them in very small doses and to use them as adjunctive treatments for the therapy of various kinds. And I'm also supportive of that if done carefully and rigorously, of course there's risk, but there's risk with many other kinds of treatments. And I'm not sure that the risks for these medications vastly outweigh the risks that we normally tolerate in other branches of medicine. - Why would they work? I mean, let's say that indeed their main effect is to create more connectivity, at least in the moment between brain areas. So the way I think about the two extremes of my experience anyways, a high degree of stress and focus for whatever reason, is going to create changes in my visual field and changes in the way that I perceive times, so that I'm on a micro-sliced time, I might be in a very contracted view of whatever my experience is, whereas on the opposite extreme in a dream or in sleep, space and time are very fluid, and I'm essentially relaxed, although it might be a very interesting dream, or it might not be. Psychedelics seemed to be a trajectory. I'm not too far off from the dream state where space and time are essentially not as rigid. And there is this element of synesthesia, blending of the senses, you know, feeling colors and hearing light and things of that sort. You hear these reports, anyway. Why would having that dream-like experience somehow relieve depression, long-term? Do we have any idea why that might be? - Yeah. We have some ideas, and no deep understanding. One way I think about the psychedelics is they increase our willingness to... They increase the willingness of our brain to accept unlikely ways of constructing the world, unlikely hypothesis, as it were, as to what's going on. The brain, in particular our cortex, I think, is a hypothesis generation and testing machine. It's coming up with models about everything. It's got a lot of bits of data coming in, and it's making models and updating the models and changing them, theories, hypothesis for what's going on. And some of those never reach our conscious mind. And this is something I talk about in "Projections" in the book quite a bit, is many of these are filtered out before they get to our conscious mind, and that's good. Think how distracted we'd be if we were constantly having to evaluate all these hypotheses about what kinds of shapes or objects or processes were out there. And so a lot of this is handled before it gets to consciousness. What the psychedelics seem to do, is they change the threshold for us to become aware of these incomplete hypotheses or wrong hypotheses, or concepts that might be noise but are just wrong, and so are never allowed to get into our conscious mind. Now, that's pretty interesting, and it goes wrong in psychiatric disorders. I think in schizophrenia there's some of the times the paranoid delusions that people have are examples of these poor models that escape into the conscious mind and become accepted as reality and they never should've gotten out there. Now, how could something like this in the right way, help with something like depression? Patients with depression often are stuck. They can't look into the future world of possibilities as effectively. Everything seems hopeless. And what does that really mean? They discount the value of their own action, they discount the value of the world at giving rise to a future that matters. Everything seems to run out like a river just running out into a desert and drying up, and what these agents may do that increase the flow through circuitry, if you will, the percolation of activity through circuitry may end up doing for depression is increasing the escape of some tendrils of process of forward progression through the world. That's a concept, that's how I think about it. There are ways we can make that rigorous. We can indeed identify in the brain by recording, we can see cells that represent steps along a path and look into the future, and we can rigorously define these cells and we can see if these are altered on psychedelics. And so that's one of the reasons that we're working with these agents in the laboratory to say, all right, is this really the case? Are these opening up new paths or representations of paths into the future? - MDMA, ecstasy is a unique compound in that it leads to big increases in brain levels of dopamine and serotonin simultaneously. And I realized that the neuromodulators like dopamine and serotonin often work in concert, not alone, the way they're commonly described in the more general popular discussions. However, it is a unique compound, and it's different than the serotonergic compounds, like LSD and psilocybin. And there are now data, still emerging that it might be, and in some cases can be useful for the treatment of trauma, PTSD and similar things. Why would that work? And a larger question, perhaps the more important question is, psychedelics, MDMA, LSD, all those compounds, in my mind there are two components. There's the experience you have while you're on them, and then there's the effect they have after. People are generating variations of these compounds that are non-hallucinatory variations. But, how crucial do you think it is to have, let's stay with MDMA, the experience of huge levels of dopamine, huge levels of serotonin, atypical levels of dopamine and serotonin released, having this highly abnormal experience in order to be normal again? - Yeah. I think the brain learns from those experiences. That's the way I see it, and so for example, people who have taken MDMA, as you say, there will be the acute phase of being on the drug and experiencing this extreme connectedness with other people for example, and then the drug wears off, but the brain learned from that experience. And so what people will report is, yeah, I'm not in that state, but I saw what was possible. I saw it. Yeah. There don't need to be barriers, or at least not as many barriers as I thought. I can connect with more people in a way that that is helpful. And so I think it's the learning that happens in that state, that actually matters. - And as you described that, that sounds a lot like what I understand to be the hallmark feature of really good psychoanalysis, that the relationship between patient and therapist, hopefully evolves to the point where these kinds of tests can be run within the context of that relationship, and then exported to other relations. - Exactly right. Yeah. - And that probably, I'm assuming is still the goal of really good psychiatry also. - As a part of- - Intimacy, really. - It should be. When we have time, I think all good psychiatrists try to achieve that level of connection and learning, try to help patients create a new model that is stable, that is learned, and that can help instruct future behavior. - One of the things that I took from reading your book, in addition to learning so much science and the future of psychiatry and brain science was, amidst this very tragic cases and sadness, and a lot of the weight that that puts on the clinician, on you also, that there's a central cord of optimism, that where we're headed is not just possible but very likely, and better. - Yeah. - And, are you an optimist? - [chuckles] I am. And by the way, this was a really interesting experience in writing "Projections", because I had a dual goal. I wanted it to be for everybody, literally everybody in the world who wants to read it. And yet at the same time, I wanted to stay absolutely rigorously close to the science, what was actually known, when I was speaking about science. When I was speaking about the neurobiology of the brain or psychiatry, I wanted to not have any of my scientific colleagues think, oh, he's going too far, he's saying too much. And so I had these two goals which I kept on my mind the entire time. And a lot of this trying to find exactly the right word we talked about was, on this path of staying excruciatingly rigorous in the science and yet, letting people see the hope, where things were, have everybody see that we've come a long way, we have a long way to go, but the trajectory and the path is beautiful. And so that was the goal, I think. Of course that sounds almost impossible [chuckles] to jointly satisfy those two goals, but I kept that in my mind the whole way through. And yes, I am optimistic and I hope that it came through in the book - It certainly did, and at least from this colleague, you did achieve both. And it's a wonderful, it's a masterful book, really, and one that as a scientist and somebody who is a fellow brain explorer, hits all the marks of rigor and is incredibly interesting and there's a ton of storytelling. I don't want to give away too much about it, but people should definitely check out the book. Are you active on social media? If people want to follow you and connect with what you're doing now and going forward? - Yeah. I have Twitter. That's where I mainly do exchange, tell people about things that are happening. - We'll provide a link to it, but that's Karl Deisseroth, as I recall, with a K? - That's right. - Yeah. - That's right. - And so you're on Twitter, and people will hear this, definitely check out the book. There are other people in our community that of course are going to be reaching out on your behalf, but it's incredible that you juggle this enormous number of things, perhaps even more important however, is that it's all in service to this larger thing of relieving suffering. So thank you so much for your time today, for the book, and the work that [chuckles] went into the book, I can't even imagine, [Karl laughs] for the laboratory work and the development of channelopsins, clarity, and all the related technologies and for the clinical work you're doing and for sharing with us. - Well, thank you for all you're doing in reaching out. I'm very impressed by it. It's important and it's so valuable, and thank you for taking the time and for all your gracious words about the book. Thank you. - I hope you enjoyed today's discussion with Dr. Deisseroth as much as I did. Be sure to check out his new book, "Projections: A Story of Human Emotions". It's available on Amazon, Audible, and all the other standard places where books are found. If you'd like to support this podcast, please subscribe to us on YouTube. As well, you can subscribe to us on Apple or Spotify. At Apple, you also have the opportunity to leave us a five-star review, and to give us feedback. Please put any questions you have in the comment section below the YouTube video, if you'd like us to address certain things in future episodes, or if you have questions about this particular episode. In addition, please check out our sponsors. That's a terrific way to support us. We also have a Patreon, it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. There you can support us at any level that you'd like. Last but not least, if you're interested in understanding more about how the brain works and how it functions, and how it breaks down in various conditions, check out the first episode of the "Huberman Lab Podcast". The title of that episode is "How your nervous system works and changes". If you're watching this right now on YouTube, you can simply click on the title card for that episode. And last but not least, [upbeat music] thank you for your interest in science.

========================================

--- Video 322 ---
Video ID: Mwz8JprPeMc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mwz8JprPeMc
Title: How Smell, Taste & Pheromone-Like Chemicals Control You
Published: 2021-06-21 12:00:19 UTC
Description:
This episode I explain how we sense chemicals by way of smell, taste and pheromones. How things smell and taste and bodily chemicals of others have a profound effect on how we feel, what we do and our hormones. I explain the 3 types of responses to smell, the 5 types of tastes, the possible existence of sixth taste sense. I explain how smell and taste reflect brain health and can be used to assess and even promote brain regeneration. Both basic science and protocols are described including how to make sour things taste sweet and how to develop a heightened sense of smell and taste.

Thank you to our sponsors:
ROKA - https://www.roka.com - code: huberman
InsideTracker - https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman
Athletic Greens - https://www.athleticgreens.com/huberman

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website: https://hubermanlab.com

Links:
1. What Is Color? By Arielle & Joann Eckstut
https://www.amazon.com/What-Color-Questions-Answers-Science/dp/1419734512
2. The smell of tears lowers testosterone
DOI: 10.1126/science.1198331
3. Inhaling (sniffing) improves non olfactory attention & cognition:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31089297/
4. Smelling Salts & Improved Athletic Performance
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28922211/
5. Taste Receptors Are Expressed By Ovaries & Testes
doi:10.1093/molehr/gat009

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introduction
00:06:02 Sensing Chemicals: Smell, Taste & Chemicals That People Make To Control Each Other
00:09:10 Vision Protocols Recap (Brief) & Correction
00:12:20 Color Vision: Excellent Resource: What is Color? (The Book)
00:13:54 How We Sense Chemicals: Enter Our Nose, Mouth, Eyes, Skin
00:17:28 The Chemicals From Other People’s Tears Lower Testosterone & Libido
00:21:16 SMELL: Sniffing, A Piece of Your Brain In Your Nose, 3 Responses To Smells
00:24:40 Smells & Memory: Why They Are So Powerfully Associated
00:26:40 Pheromone Effects: Spontaneous Miscarriage, Males & Timing Female Puberty
00:28:56 Sniffing Creates Alertness & If Done Properly Can Help You Focus & Learn Better
00:34:00 Protocol 1: Sniffing (Nothing) 10-15X Enhances Your Ability to Smell & Taste
00:35:50 Smelling Salts, Ammonia & Adrenaline 
00:38:25 How You Can Become A Human Scent Hound, Detecting Cancer, & Tasting Better
00:43:45 Smell As A Readout Of Brain Health & Longevity; Regaining Lost Sense Of Smell
00:48:30 Dopamine, Sense Of Smell, New Neurons & New Relationships
00:50:20 Why Brain Injury Causes Loss Of Smell; Using Smell To Gauge & Speed Recovery 
00:53:33 Using Smell To Immediately Becoming Physically Stronger
00:54:40 Smelling In Our Dreams, Active Sniffing In Sleep, Sniffing As a Sign Of Consciousness
00:57:35 Mint Scents Create Alertness By Activating Broad Wake-Up Pathways 
00:59:48 Protocol 2 Pleasant Or Putrid: The Microwave Popcorn Test, Cilantro, Asparagus, Musk
01:03:00 Skunks, Costello, All Quiet On The Western Front  
01:04:32 TASTE: Sweet, Salty, Bitter, Umami, Sour; Your Tongue, Gustatory Nerve, NST, Cortex
01:08:45 Energy, Electrolytes, Poisons, Gagging, Amino Acid & Fatty Acid Sensing, Fermentation
01:13:48 Our 6th Sense of Taste: FAT Sensing
01:15:05 Gut-Brain: Your Mouth As An Extension Of Your Gut; Burned Mouth & Regeneration
01:19:30 Protocol 3: Learn To Be A Super-Taster By Top-Down Behavioral Plasticity
01:22:20 The Umami-Sweet Distinction: Tigers Versus Pandas
01:25:05 Eating More Plants Versus Eating More Meat, Cravings & Desire
01:27:15 Food That Makes You Feel Good Or Bad: Taste Receptors On Our Testes Or Ovaries
01:30:05 Biological Basis For The Sensuality of Umami and Sweet Foods
01:32:28 Appetitive & Aversive Sensing: Touching Certain Surfaces, Tasting Certain Foods
01:33:35 Amino Acids Are Key To Life, The Maillard Reaction, Smell-Taste Merge, Food Texture
01:39:00 How Processed Food Make You Crave More Processed Foods
01:39:44 Protocol 4: Invert Your Sense of Sweet & Sour: Miracle Fruit; Swapping Bitter & Sweet
01:43:03 Pheromones, Desire To Continue Mating: Coolidge Effect Occurs In Males & Females
01:46:40 Do Women Influence Each Others Menstrual Cycles? 
01:49:19 Recognizing the Smell Of Your Romantic Partner 
01:50:30 Differences In Odor Detection Ability, Effects Of Hormones
01:53:00 We Rub The Chemicals Of Others On Our Eyes and Skin, Bunting Behavior
01:56:40 Summary

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [gentle music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Roka. Roka makes sunglasses and eyeglasses that in my opinion are the absolute best out there. The sunglasses and eyeglasses that are made by Roka have a number of properties that are really unique. First of all, they're extremely lightweight, you never even notice that they're on your face. Second, the optical clarity is fantastic. One of the things that's really hard to accomplish, but that Roka succeeded in accomplishing is making sunglasses that you can wear in lots of different environments. As you move from bright to shadowed regions for instance, or as the amount of sunlight changes many eyeglasses will make it such that it's hard to see your environment and you need to take the eyeglasses off, or you can't see or detect borders. With Roka sunglasses, all of that is seamless, they clearly understand the adaptation mechanisms and habituation mechanisms, all these fancy details about the human visual system have allowed them to design a sunglass that allows you to be in any environment and to see that environment extremely well. The eyeglasses are terrific, I wear readers at night and again, they just make the whole experience of reading or working on a screen at night very, very easy, very easy on the eyes. The aesthetic of the eyeglasses and sunglasses is also suburb. You know, I chuckle sometimes when I see sports frames or sports glasses, a lot of them just look ridiculous frankly, but the Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses have a terrific aesthetic, they have a huge variety to select from. If you'd like to try Roka glasses, you can go to Roka, that's roka.com and enter the code Huberman and you'll get 20% off your first order, that's roka.com and enter the code Huberman to get 20% off your first order. Today's podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I'm a big believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be detected from a quality blood test. One of the major problems with blood tests however is that oftentimes you'll get information back about levels of metabolic factors, hormones, et cetera, and there won't be any directives about what to do with that information. With InsideTracker, it makes all of that very easy. First of all, they can come to your home to do the blood test and DNA test or you can go to a local clinic, they make that very easy. Second of all, when you get the information back about the levels of hormones, and metabolic factors, and other things in your blood it gives you simple directives. They have a dashboard that allows you to assess for instance, whether or not you ought to make changes in your nutrition, or changes in your exercise, or changes in your sleep regimen, any number of different lifestyle factors that can help bring the markers and the various factors in your blood and DNA to the appropriate levels. So, really they're putting you in the driver's seat for your health. In fact, one of the listeners of this podcast contacted me recently and said I took an InsideTracker test, I felt like I was in great health, but I noticed from the test that I had high CRP, C-reactive protein. C-reactive protein is a marker that if it's too high is a cautionary note about various cardiac and even eye diseases, so it's something that they are now taking actions on as a consequence of getting their blood work done and taking the InsideTracker test. So, I think that's just one of many examples that we hear about. I have examples from my own life for instance of different factors in my blood being off and making adjustments to nutrition and other aspects of my life that have allowed me to bring those into the proper range. So, if you care about your health InsideTracker may very well be right for you. If you'd like to try InsideTracker you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman. And if you do that, you'll get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans, just use the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral probiotic drink. I've been using Athletic Greens since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. Athletic Greens is terrific because it covers your nutritional bases. If I drink Athletic Greens once and I sometimes drink it twice a day, then I'm sure that all the vitamins I need, I'm getting those. All the minerals I need, I'm getting those, and the probiotics. There's now a ton of data showing that a healthy gut microbiome is vital to brain function, vital to immune function, and vital to all aspects of our health. So with Athletic Greens, you get the vitamins, the minerals, and the probiotics to cover all your bases. In fact, anytime people ask me what should they take or what could they do to support their health, provided that they already have their sleep and other aspects of their life in order, Athletic Greens is the thing that I recommend because it covers all the foundations, all the bases of what one really wants from a supplement without having to take a ton of different things. It also tastes great, almost everybody that tries it and then reported back to me has told me that they really liked the taste. I mix mine with water, a little bit of lemon and lime juice, and I really like the taste, it's delicious to me. I drink it once or twice a day. It's keto compatible, it's compatible with most fasting regimens, it's compatible with if you're a vegan or if you're not vegan, it's compatible with essentially every nutritional plan out there, so it's just a terrific all around supplement and benefit to one's health and diet. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman. And if you do that, you'll claim a special offer, they'll give you five free travel packs that make it easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road, and they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3, K2. Again, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim that special offer. This month, we've been talking about the senses, how we detect things in our environment. The last episode was all about vision, how we take light and convert that information into things that we can perceive like colors, and faces, and motion, things of that sort as well as how we use light to change our biology in ways that are subconscious that we don't realize, things like mood, and metabolism, and levels of alertness. Today, we're going to talk about chemical sensing, we're going to talk about the sense of smell, our ability to detect odors in our environment. We're also going to talk about taste, our ability to detect chemicals and make sense of chemicals that are put in our mouth and into our digestive tract. And we are going to talk about chemicals that are made by other human beings that powerfully modulator the way that we feel, our hormones, and our health. Now, that last category are sometimes called pheromones. However, whether or not pheromones exist in humans is rather controversial, there actually hasn't been a clear example of a true human pheromonal effect, but what is absolutely clear, what is undeniable is that there are chemicals that human beings make and release in things like tears onto our skin, and sweat, and even breath that powerfully modulate or control the biology of other individuals. In fact right now, even if you're completely alone, your chemical environment internally is being controlled by external chemicals, your nervous system, and your hormones, and your metabolism are being modified by things in your environment, so we're going to talk about those. It's an absolutely fascinating aspect to our biology, it's one of our most primordial, meaning primitive aspects of our biology, but it's still very active in all of us today. This episode, believe it or not, will have a lot of tools, a lot of protocols. Even though I'm guessing most of you can probably smell your environment just fine, that you know what you like to eat and what tastes good, and what doesn't taste good to you, today's episode is going to talk about tools that will allow you to actually leverage these chemical sensing mechanisms, including how you smell not how you smell in the qualitative sense, but how you smell in the verb sense, the action of sniffing and smelling to enhance your sense of smell and to enhance your sense of taste as well, believe it or not, to enhance your cognition, your ability to learn and remember things. Everything we're going to talk about as always is grounded in quality peer-reviewed studies from some excellent laboratories, I'll provide some resources along the way, so that means tools and protocols and also basic information. You're going to learn a ton of neuroscience and lot of biology in general. And I think what you'll come to realize by the end is that while we are clearly different from the other animals, there are aspects to our biology that are very similar to that of other animals in very interesting ways. Before we dive into chemical sensing, I want to just briefly touch on a few things from the vision episode. One is a summary of a protocol. So, I covered 13 protocols last episode, if you haven't seen that episode, check it out. Those protocols will allow you to be more alert and to see better over time if you follow them. All of them are zero cost, you can find any and all of them at hubermanlab.com, there's a link to those videos and tools and protocols, everything is timestamped. The two protocols that I just want to remind everybody of are the protocol of near-far viewing that all of us regardless of age, should probably spend about five minutes three times a week, doing some near-far viewing exercises. So, that would be bringing a pen or pencil up close to the point where you're about to cross your eyes, but you don't cross your eyes and then out at some distance. And then look beyond that pen or other object that you're using off as far as you can into the distance. It would be great if you could do this on a balcony or deck and then look way off in the distance and then bring it back in. This is going to exercise that accommodation reflex, the change in the shape of the lens can help offset a number of things including myopia, near-sightedness. The other one is this incredible study that showed that two hours a day outside, even if you're doing other things while you're outside can help offset myopia, nearsightedness. So, try and get outside, it's really the sunlight and the blue light, right? Everyone's been demonizing blue light out there, but blue light is great provided it's not super, super bright and really close to your eyes. Blue is terrific if it comes from sunlight. Two hours a day outside is going to help offset myopia, nearsightedness. Now, that's a lot of time, I think most of us are not getting that time, but since you can do other things like gardening, or reading, or walking, or running. If you can get that two hours outside your visual system and your brain will benefit. I also would like to make one brief correction to something that I said incorrectly in the previous episode. At the end of the episode, I talked about lutein, and how lutein may help offset some moderate to severe age-related macular degeneration. As well, I talked about how some people are supplementing with lutein even though they don't have age-related macular degeneration with the idea in mind that it might help offset some vision loss as they get older. I said lutein, and lutein was the correct thing to say, but once or twice, when I started speaking fast I said leucine and not lutein. I want to emphasize that leucine, an amino acid, very interesting, important for muscle building covered in previous episodes, but lutein, L-U-T-E-I-N, is the molecule and compound that I was referring to in terms of supplementing for sake of vision. So I apologize, please forgive me I misspoke, a couple of you caught that right away, in listening to the episode after it went up I realized that I had misspoken. So, lutein for vision, leucine for muscles, and muscle growth, and strength, et cetera. Before we dive into the content of today's episode, I want to just briefly touch on color vision. Many of you asked questions about color vision and color perception. And indeed color perception is a fascinating aspect of the human visual system, it's one of the things that makes us unique. There are certainly other animals out there that can detect all the colors of the rainbow, some can even detect into the infrared, into the far-red that we can't see, but nonetheless, human color vision, provided that somebody isn't colorblind, is really remarkable. And if you're interested in color vision or you want to answer questions about art or about for instance why that dress that showed up online a few years ago looks blue to you and yellow to somebody else. All the answers to that are in this terrific book which is "What Is Color?: 50 Questions and Answers on the Science of Color". I did not write this book, I wish I had, the book is by Arielle and Joann Eckstut, that E-C-K-S-T-U-T. So, it's "What Is Color?: 50 Questions and Answers on the Science of Color". It's an absolutely fabulous book, I've no business relationship to them. I did help them get in contact with some color vision scientists when they reached out to me. And you can know that all the information in the book was vetted by excellent color vision scientists. It's a really wonderful and beautiful book, the illustrations are beautiful. If you're somebody who's interested in design or art, or you're just curious about the science of color, it's a terrific book, I highly recommend it. If you just look it up online, there are a variety of places that will allow you to access the book. So, let's talk about sensing chemicals and how chemicals control us. In our environment, there are a lot of different physical stimuli. There is light, photons, which are light energy and those land on your retinas and your retinas tell your brain about them, and your brain creates this thing we call vision. There are sound waves, literally particles moving through the air and reverberations that create what we call sound and hearing. And of course there are mechanical stimuli, pressure, light touch, scratch, tickle, et cetera, that lands on our skin or the blowing of a breeze that deflects the hairs on our skin, and we can sense mechanical touch, mechanical sensation. And there are chemicals, there are things floating around in the environment which we call volatile chemicals. So, volatile sounds oftentimes like emotionally volatile, but it just means that they're floating around out there. So, when you actually smell something like let's say you smell a wonderfully smelling rose or cake. Yes, you are inhaling the particles into your nose, they're literally little particles of those chemicals are going up into your nose and being detected by your brain. Also, if you smell something putrid, disgusting, or awful, use your imagination, those particles are going up into your nose and being detected by neurons that are part of your brain. Other ways of getting chemicals into our system is by putting them in our mouth, by literally taking foods and chewing them, or sucking on them and breaking them down into their component parts, and that's one way that we sense chemicals with this thing, our tongue. And there are chemicals that can enter through other mucosal linings and other kind of just think damp, sticky linings of your body. And the main ones would be the eyes, so you've got your nose, your eyes and your mouth. But mainly when we have chemicals coming into our system it's through our nose or through our mouth. Although, sometimes through our skin certain things can go transdermal, not many, and through our eyes. So these chemicals, we sometimes bring into our body, into our biology, through deliberate action. We select a food, we chew that food, and we do it intentionally. Sometimes they're coming into our body through non-deliberate action. We enter an environment, and there's smoke and we smell the smoke, and as a consequence we take action. Sometimes we are forced to eat something because somebody tells us we should eat it or we do it to be polite. So, there are all these ways that chemicals can make it into our body. Sometimes however, other people are actively making chemicals with their body, typically this would be with their breath, with their tears, or possibly, I want to underscore possibly, by making what are called pheromones, molecules that they release into the environment typically through the breath that enter our system through our nose, or our eyes, or our mouth that fundamentally change our biology. I will explain how smell and taste and these pheromone effects work, but I'll just give an example, which is a very salient and interesting one that was published about 10 years ago in the Journal Science. Science Magazine is one of the three what we call apex journals. There are a lot of journals out there, but for those of you that want to know, Science Magazine, Nature Magazine, and Cell are considered the three top kind of apex journals, they are the most stringent in terms of getting papers accepted, they're even reviewed there. They have about a 95% rejection rate at the front gate, meaning they don't even review 95% of what gets sent to them. Of the things that they do decide to review then get sent out, a very small percentage of those get published, it's very stringent. This paper came out in Science showing that humans, men in particular in this study, have a strong biological response and hormonal response to the tears of women. What they did is they had women, and in this case it was only women for whatever reason, cry and they collected their tears. Then those tears were smelled by male subjects, or male subjects got what was essentially the control, which was the saline. Men that smelled these tears that were evoked by sadness had a reduction in their testosterone levels that was significant. They also had a reduction in brain areas that were associated with sexual arousal. Now, before you run off with your interpretations about what this means and criticize the study for any variety of reasons, let's just take a step back. I will criticize the study for a variety of reasons too. One is that they only used female tiers and male subjects, so it would have been nice for them to also use female tears and female subjects smelling those, male tears and male subjects smelling those, male tears and female subjects smelling those, and so on. They didn't do that, they did have a large number of subjects, so that's good, that adds power to the study. And they did have to collect these tears by having the women watch what was essentially a sad scene from a movie. They actually recruited subjects that had a high propensity for crying at sad movies, which was not all women. It turns out that the people that they recruited for the study were people who said, "Yes, I tend to cry when I see sad things in movies." What they're really trying to do is get just get tears that were authentically cried in response to sadness, as opposed to putting some irritant in the eye and collecting tears that were evoked by something else like just having the eyes irritated. Nonetheless, what this study illustrates is that there are chemicals in tears that are evoking or changing the biology of other individuals. Now, most of us don't think about sniffing or smelling other people's tears, but you can imagine how in close couples, or in family members, or even close friendships, et cetera, that we are often in close proximity to other people's tears. Now, I didn't select this study as an example because I want to focus on the effects of tears on hormones, per se, although I do find the results really interesting. I chose it because I wanted to just emphasize or underscore the fact that chemicals that are made by other individuals are powerfully modulating our internal state, and that's something that most of us don't appreciate. I think most of us can appreciate the fact that if we smell something putrid, we tend to retract, or if we smell something delicious, we tend to lean into it. But there are all these ways in which chemicals are affecting our biology, and interpersonal communication using chemicals is not something that we hear that often about, but it's super interesting. So, let's talk about smell and what smell is and how it works. I'm going to make this very basic, but I am going to touch on some of the core elements of the neurobiology. So, here's how smell works. Smell starts with sniffing. Now, that may come as no surprise, but no volatile chemicals can enter our nose unless we inhale them. If our nose is occluded, or if we're actively exhaling it's much more difficult for smells to enter our nose, which is why people cover their nose when something smells bad. Now, the way that these volatile odors come into the nose is interesting. The nose has a mucosal lining, mucus that is designed to trap things, to actually bring things in and get stuck there. At the base of your brain, so you could actually imagine this or if you wanted, you could touch the roof of your mouth. So, right above the roof of the mouth, about two centimeters is your olfactory bulb. The olfactory bulb is a collection of neurons and those neurons actually extend out of the skull, out of your skull into your nose into the mucosal lining. So, what this means in kind of a literal sense is that you have neurons that extend their little dendrites and axon-like things, they're little processes as we call them, out into the mucus, and they respond to different odorant compounds. Now, the olfactory neurons also send a branch deeper into the brain and they split off into three different paths. So, one path is for what we call innate odor responses, so you have some hard wired aspects to the way that you smell the world that were there from the day you were born and that will be there until the day you die. These are the pathways and the neurons that respond to things like smoke, which as you can imagine there's a highly adaptive function to being able to detect burning things because burning things generally means lack of safety or impending threat of some kind. It calls for action, and indeed these neurons project to the central area of the brain called the amygdala, which is often discussed in terms of fear, but it's really fear and threat detection. So some compounds, some chemicals in your environment when you smell them, unless you're trained to overcome them because you're a firefighter you will naturally have a heightened level of alertness, you will sense threat, and if you're in sleep, even it will wake you up. All right, so that's a good thing, it's kind of an emergency system. You also have neurons in your nose that respond to odorants or combinations of odorants that evoke a sense of desire and what we call appetitive behaviors, approach behaviors, that make you want to move toward something. So, when you smell a delicious cookie, or some dish that's really savory that you really like, or a wonderful orange, and you say, "Mmm," or it feels delicious, or it smells delicious that's because of these innate pathway, these pathways that require no learning whatsoever. Now, some of the pathways from the nose, these olfactory neurons into the brain are involved in learned associations with odors. Many people have this experience that they can remember the smell of their grandmother's home, or their grandmother's hands even, or the smell of particular items baking, or on the stove in a particular environment. Typically, these memories tend to be of a kind of nurturing sort of feeling safe and protected. But one of the reasons why olfaction smell is so closely tied to memory is because olfaction is the most ancient sense that we have, or I should say chemical sensing is among the most primitive and ancient senses that we have, probably almost certainly evolved before vision and before hearing. But when we come into the world because we're still learning about the statistics of life about who's friendly and who's not friendly, and where's a fun place to be and where's a boring place to be, that all takes a long time to learn. But the olfactory system seems to imprint, seems to lay down memories very early and create these very powerful associations. And if you think about it long enough and hard enough many of you can probably realize that there are certain smells that evoke a memory of a particular place, or person, or context. And that's because you also have pathways out of the nose that are not for innate behaviors like cringing, or repulsion, or gagging, or for that appetitive mmm sensation, but that just remind you of a place, or a thing, or a context, could be flowers in spring, could be grandmother's home and cookies. This is a very common occurrence, and it's a very common occurrence because this generally exists in all of us. So, we have pathway for innate responses and a pathway for learned responses. And then we have this other pathway, and in humans it's a little bit controversial as to whether or not it sits truly separate from the standard olfactory system or whether or not it's its own system embedded in there, but that they call the accessory olfactory pathway. Accessory olfactory pathway is what in other animals is responsible for true pheromone effects. We will talk about true pheromone effects, but for example in rodents and in some primates, including mandrills. If you've ever seen a mandrill, they have these like big beak noses things, you may have seen them at the zoo, look them up if you haven't seen them already, M-A-N-D-R-I-L-S mandrills, there are strong pheromone effects. Some of those include things like if you take a pregnant female rodent or mandrill, you take away the father that created those fetuses or fetus, and you introduce the scent of the urine or the fur of a novel male, she will spontaneously abort or miscarry those fetuses, it's a very powerful effect. In humans, it's still controversial whether or not anything like that can happen, but it's a very powerful pheromonal effect in other animals. Another example of a pheromone effect is called the Vandenbergh effect named after the person who discovered this effect, where you take a female of a given species that has not entered puberty, you expose her to the scent or the urine from a sexually competent, meaning post-pubertal male, and she spontaneously goes into puberty earlier. So, something about the scent triggers something through this accessory olfactory system, this is a true pheromonal effect and creates ovulation, right and menstruation. Or in rodents it's an estrous cycle, not a menstrual cycle. So, this is not to say that the exact same things happen in humans. In humans, as I mentioned earlier, there are chemical sensing between individuals that may be independent of the nose. And we will talk about those, but those are basically the three paths by which smells, odors impact us. So, I want to talk about the act of smelling, and if you are not somebody who is very interested in smell, but you are somebody who is interested in making your brain work better, learning faster, remembering more things, this next little segment is for you because it turns out that how you smell, meaning the act of smelling, not how good or bad you smell, but the act of smelling, sniffing, and inhalation powerfully impacts how your brain functions and what you can learn and what you can't learn. Breathing generally consists of two actions, inhaling and exhaling, and we have the option of course to do that through our nose or our mouth. I've talked on previous episodes about the fact that there are great advantages to being a nasal breather, and there are a great disadvantages to being a mouth breather. There are excellent books and data on this, there's the recent book "Breath" by James Nestor, which is an excellent book that describes some of the positive effects of nasal breathing as well as other breathing practices. There's also the book "Jaws" by my colleagues, Paul Ehrlich and Sandra Kahn, with a foreword by Jared Diamond and an introduction by Robert Sapolsky from Stanford. So, that's a book chockablock with heavy hitter authors that describes how being a nasal breather is beneficial for jaw structure, for immune system function, et cetera Breathing in through your nose, sniffing actually has positive effects on the way that you can acquire and remember information. Noam Sobel's group originally at UC Berkeley and then at the Weizmann Institute has published a number of papers that I'd like to discuss today. One of them, Human Non-Olfactory Cognition Phase-Locked with Inhalation, this was published in Nature Human Behavior, an excellent journal. Showed that the act of inhaling [Andrew inhales deeply] has a couple of interesting and powerful consequences. First of all, as we inhale the brain increases in arousal, our level of alertness and attention increases when we inhale as compared to when we exhale. Now, of course with every inhale, there's an exhale, you could probably double up on your inhales if you're doing size or something, physiological size I've talked about these before, so double inhales [inhales twice] followed by an exhale [exhales], something like that. Or if you're speaking, you're going to change your cadence and ratio of inhales and exhales, but typically we inhale, then we exhale. As we inhale, what this paper shows is that the level of alertness goes up in the brain, and this makes sense because as the most primitive and primordial sense by which we interact with our environment and bring chemicals into our system and detect our environment, inhaling is a cue for the rest of the brain to essentially to pay attention to what's happening, not just to the odors as the name of this paper suggests, Human Non-Olfactory Cognition Phase-Locked with Inhalation. What that means is that the act of inhaling itself wakes up the brain, it's not about what you're perceiving or what you're smelling. And indeed sniffing as an action, inhaling as an action has a powerful effect on your ability to be alert, your ability to attend, to focus, and your ability to remember information. When we exhale, the brain goes through a subtle, but nonetheless significant dip in level of arousal and ability to learn. So, what does this mean? How should you use this knowledge? Well, you could imagine, and I think this will be beneficial for most people to focus on nasal breathing while doing any kind of focused work that doesn't require that you speak, or eat, or ingest something. There's a separate paper published in the journal of neuroscience that showed that indeed if subjects, human subjects, are restricted to breathing through their nose, they learn better than if they have the option of breathing through their mouth, or a combination of their nose and mouth. These are significant effects in humans using modern techniques from excellent groups. So, sniffing itself is a powerful modulator of our cognition and our ability to learn. You can imagine all sorts of ways that you might apply that as a tool. And I suggest that you play with it a bit that if you're having a hard time staying awake and alert, you're having a hard time remembering information, you feel like you have a kind of attention deficit, nonclinical of course, nasal breathing ought to help, extending or making your inhales more intense ought to help. Now, this isn't really about chemical sensing per se, but here's where it gets interesting and exciting. If you are somebody who doesn't have a very good sense of smell, or you're somebody who simply wants to get better at smelling and tasting things, you can actually practice sniffing. I know that sounds ridiculous, but it turns out that simply sniffing nothing. So, doing something like this. [Andrew sniffs deeply] I guess the microphone sort of has a smell [sniffs], I guess my pen doesn't have a smell. [Andrew sniffs deeply] It turns out that doing a series of inhales, and of course each one is followed by an exhale, 10 or 15 times and then smelling an object like an orange or another item of food, or even the skin of somebody else will lead to an increase in your ability to perceive those odors. Now, there are probably two reasons for that. One reason is that the brain systems of detecting things are waking up as a mere consequence of inhaling. Okay, so this is sort of the olfactory equivalent of opening your eyes wider in order to see, more or less. Okay, last episode I talked about how opening your eyes wider actually increases your level of alertness, it's not just that your level of alertness causes your eyes to be open wider. Opening your eyes wider can actually increase your level of alertness. Well, it turns out that breathing more deeply through the nose, wakes up your brain and it creates a heightened sensitivity of the neurons that relate to smell. And there's a close crossover, I'm sure you know this, between smell and taste. If any of you have ever had a cold or you have for whatever reason you've lost your sense of smell, you become what they call anosmic, your sense of taste suffers also. We'll talk a little bit more about why that is in a few minutes, but as a first protocol, I'd really like all of you to consider becoming nasal breathers while you're trying to learn, while you're trying to listen, while you're trying to wake up your brain in any way and learn and retain information, this is a powerful tool. Now, there are other ways to wake up your brain more as well. For instance, the use of smelling salts. I'm not recommending that you do this necessarily, but there are excellent peer reviewed data showing that indeed, if you use smelling salts, which are mostly of the sort that include ammonia, ammonia is a very toxic scent, but it's toxic in a way that triggers this innate pathway, the pathway from the nose to the amygdala, and wakes up the brain and body in a major way. This is why they use smelling salts when people pass out, this is why fighters used to use or maybe sometimes still use smelling salts in order to heighten their level of alertness, this is why powerlifters will inhale smelling salts. They work because they trigger the fear and kind of overall arousal systems of the brain, this is why I think most people probably shouldn't use ammonia or smelling salts to try and wake up, but they really do work. If you've ever smelled smelling salts and I have, I tried this, they give you a serious jolt, it's like six espresso infused into your bloodstream all at once, you are wide awake immediately and you feel a heightened sense of kind of desire to move because you release adrenaline into your body. Now, inhaling through your nose and doing nasal breathing is not going to do that, it's going to be a more subtle version of waking up your system of alerting your brain overall. And for those of you that are interested in having a richer, a more deep connection to the things that you smell and taste, including other individuals perhaps not just food, practicing or enhancing your sense of sniffing, your ability to sniff might sound like a kind of ridiculous protocol, but it's actually a kind of fun and cool experiment that you can do. You just do the simple experiment of taking for instance an orange, you smell it, try and gauge your level of perception of how orange-ish it smells, or lemony, lemonish, lemony, I don't know is it lemonish or lemony? Lemony it smells, then set it away, do 10 or 15 inhales [Andrew inhales and exhales] followed by exhales of course, or just through the nose. [Andrew breaths rapidly] I'm not going to do all 10 or 15. And then smell it again, and you'll notice that your perception of that smell, the kind of richness of that smell will be significantly increased. And that's again, for two reasons, one, the brain is in a position to respond to it better, your brain has been aroused by the mere act of sniffing, but also the neurons that respond to that lemon odor, that lemony or odor are going to respond better. So, you can actually have a heightened experience of something, and that of course will also be true for the taste system. You also can really train your sense of smell to get much, much better. When Noam Sobel's group was at Berkeley I happened to be a graduate student around that time, and every once in a while I'd look outside and there would be people crawling around on the grass with goggles on, gloves on, and these hoods on with earmuffs. And they looked ridiculous, but what they were doing is they were actually learning to follow scent trails. So, in the world of dogs you have sight hounds that use their eyes in order to navigate and find things, and you have scent towns that use their nose. And the scent hounds are remarkable, they can be trained to detect a scent. These are the sniffing, you know, the bomb sniffing and the drug sniffing dogs in airports. There are now dogs actually that can sniff out COVID infections with a very high degree of accuracy, they can be trained to do that. There's something about the COVID and similar infections that the body produces probably in the immune response, some odors and the dogs are I think as high as 90% in some cases, maybe even 95% accuracy, just remarkable. There are theories that dogs can sniff out cancer, this stuff all exceeds statistical significance. It's still a little bit mysterious in some ways, but you may not ever achieve the olfactory capabilities of a scent hound, but what Noam Sobel's lab did is they had people completely eliminate their visual experience by having them wear dark glasses or goggles, so they couldn't see, and they couldn't hear, they couldn't sense anything with their sense of touch, they had thick gloves on. But they had these masks on where just their nasal passages were open and people could in a fairly short amount of time learn to follow a chocolate scent trail on the ground, which is not something that most people want to do, but what they showed using brain imaging, et cetera in subsequent studies is that the human brain, you can learn to really enhance your sense of smell and become very astute in distinguishing whether or not one particular odor or combinations of odors is such that it's less than, or more than a different odor for instance. Now, why would you want to do this? Well, if you like to eat as much as I do, one of the things that can really enhance your sense of pleasure from the experience of ingesting food is to enhance your sense of smell. And if you don't have a great sense of smell, or if you have a sense of smell that's really so good that it's always picking up bad odors, we'll talk about that in a minute. Well, then you might want to tune up your sense of smell by doing this practice of 10 or 15 breaths, excuse me, sniffs, not breaths, sniffs and then interacting with some food item or thing that you're interested in smelling more of. So, these could be the ingredients that you're cooking with, I really encourage you to try and really smell them. You sometimes hear this as kind of a mindfulness practice like ooh, really smell the food, really taste the food. And we always hear about that as kind of a mindfulness and presence thing, but you actually can increase the sensitivity of your olfactory and your taste system by doing this. And it has long-term effects, that's what's so interesting. This isn't the kind of thing that you have to do every time you eat. You don't have to be the weirdo in the restaurant that's like picking up the radish and like jamming it up your nostrils, please don't do that. You don't have to necessarily smell everything, although it's nice sometimes to smell the food that you're about to eat and as you eat it, but it has long-term effects in terms of your ability to distinguish and discriminate different types of odors. And these don't even have to be very pungent foods it turns out, the studies show that doesn't have to be some really stinky cheese, you know, there are cheese shops that I've walked into where like I just basically gag, I can't handle it, I just can't be in there, it just overwhelms me. Other people, they love that smell. So, you have to tune it to your interest and experience, but I think even for you fasters out there, everybody eats at some point, everybody ingests chemicals through their mouth. And one of the ways that you can powerfully increase your relationship to that experience and make it much more positive is through just the occasional practice of 10 or 15 sniffs of nothing, which almost sounds ridiculous like how could that be? But now, you understand why, it's because of the way that the sniffing action increases the alertness of the brain as well as increasing the sensitivity of the system. No other system that I'm aware of in our body is as amenable to these kinds of behavioral training shifts and allow them to happen so quickly. I would love to be able to tell you that just doing 10 or 15 near-far exercises with a pen or going outside for 10 or 15 seconds each morning is going to completely change the way that you see the world. But it actually isn't the case, you actually, it requires more training, a little bit more effort in the visual system. In the olfactory system, and your smell system, and in your taste system just the tiniest bit of training and attention, and sniffing, inhaling can radically change your relationship to food such that you actually start to feel very different as a consequence of ingesting those foods as well as becoming more discerning about which foods you like and which ones you don't like. And we're going to talk about that because there's a really wonderful thing that happens when you start developing a sensitive palate and a sensitive sense of smell in a way that allows you to guide your eating and smelling decisions, and maybe even interpersonal decisions about who you spend time with, or mate with, or whatever, in a way that is really in line with your biology. In fact, how well we can smell and taste things is actually a very strong indication of our brain health. Now, that's not to say that if you have a poor sense of smell or a poor sense of taste, that you're somehow brain damaged or you're going to have dementia, although sometimes early signs of dementia or loss of neurons in other regions of the brain related to say Parkinson's can show up first as a loss of sense of smell. Again, it's not causal, and it's certainly not the case that every time you have a sudden loss of smell that there's necessarily brain damage, I want to be very about that, but they are often correlated. There's also a lot of interest right now in loss of sense of smell because one of the early detection signs of COVID-19 was a loss of sense of smell. So, I just briefly want to talk about loss of sense of smell and regaining sense of smell and taste because these have powerful implications for overall health. And in fact can indicate something about brain damage and can even inform how quickly we might be recovering from something like a concussion. So, our olfactory neurons, these neurons in our nose that detect odors are really unique among other brain neurons because they get replenished throughout life, they don't just regenerate, but they get replenished. So regeneration is when something is damaged and it regrows, these neurons are constantly turning over throughout our lifespan, they're constantly being replenished, they're dying off and they're being replaced by new ones. This is an amazing aspect of our brain that's basically unique to these neurons, there's one other region of the brain where there's a little bit of this maybe, but these olfactory neurons about every three or four weeks they die. And when they die, they're replaced by new ones that come from a different region of the brain, a region called the subventricular zone. The name isn't as important, but as the phenomenon, but these neurons are born in the ventricle, the area of your brain that's a hole that contains... It's not an empty hole, it's a hole basically that contains cerebral spinal fluid. Well, there's a little subventricular zone, there's a little zone below, sub ventricles. And that zone, if you are exercising regularly, if your dopamine levels are high enough, those little cells there are like stem cells. They are stem cells and they spit out what are called little neuroblasts, those little neuroblasts migrate into the front of your brain and then shimmy, they kind of move through what's called the rostral migratory stream. They kind of shimmy along and land back in your olfactory bulb, settle down and extend little wires into your olfactory mucosa. This is an ongoing process of what we call neurogenesis or the birth of new neurons. Now, this is really interesting because other neurons in your cortex, in your retina, in your cerebellum, they do not do this, they are not continually replenished throughout life. But these neurons, these olfactory neurons are, they are special. And there are a number of things that seem to increase the amount of olfactory neuron neurogenesis. There is evidence that exercise, blood flow, can increase olfactory neuron neurogenesis. Although, those data are fewer in comparison to things like social interactions, or actually interacting with odorants of different kinds. So, if you're somebody who doesn't smell things well, you have a poor sense of smell, your olfactory system doesn't seem very sensitive, more sniffing, more smelling is going to be good. And then the molecule dopamine, this neuromodulator, that is associated with motivation and drive. And in some cases, if it's very, very high with mania, or if it's very, very low with depression or Parkinson's, but for most people where dopamine is in essentially normal ranges dopamine is also a powerful trigger of the establishment of these new neurons and their migration into the olfactory bulb and your ability to smell. Now, you don't want to confuse correlation with causation, so if you're not good at smelling does that mean you have low dopamine? No, not necessarily. If you have low dopamine, does that mean that you have a poor sense of smell? No, not necessarily. Some people who take antidepressants of the sort that impact the dopamine system strongly like Wellbutrin will report a sudden, meaning within a couple of days, increase in their ability to smell particular odors, and it's a very striking effect. Some people when they are in a new relationship because dopamine and the hormones, testosterone and estrogen are associated with novelty and the sorts of behaviors that often are associated with new relationships those three molecules; dopamine, testosterone, and estrogen kind of work together. And oftentimes people will say or report when they're newly in love or in a new relationship that they're just obsessed with, or they just so enjoy the scent of another person so much so that they like to borrow the other person's clothing or they'll sniff the other person's clothing or they can even just in the absence of the person they can imagine their smell and feel a biological response, something that we'll talk more about. So, these neurons turnover throughout the lifespan and as we age, we actually can lose our sense of smell. And it's likely, I want to underscore likely, that that loss of sense of smell as we age is correlated with a loss of other neurons in the retina, in the ears, a loss of vision, loss of hearing, loss of smell, loss of the sense apparati which our neurons is correlated with aging. So, what we've been talking about today is the ability to sense these odors, but what I'd like to do is empower you with tools that will allow you to keep these systems tuned up. Last time, we talked about tuning up and keeping your visual system tuned up and healthy regardless of age. Here, we're talking about really enhancing your olfactory abilities, your taste abilities as well by interacting a lot with odors, preferably positive odors, and sniffing more, inhaling more, which almost sounds crazy, but now you understand why. Even though it might sound crazy it's grounded in real mechanistic biology of how the brain wakes up and responds to these chemicals. Now, speaking of brain injury, olfactory dysfunction is a common theme in traumatic brain injury for the following reason, these olfactory neurons as I mention extend wires into the mucosa of the nose, but they also extend a wire up into the skull. And they extend up into the skull through what's called the cribriform plate, it's like a Swiss cheese type plate where they're going through. And if you get a head hit, that bone, the cribriform plate, sheers those little wires off and those neurons die. Now, eventually they'll be replaced, but there's a phenomenon by which concussion and the severity of concussion and the recovery from a head injury can actually be gauged in part, in part, not in whole, but in part by how well or fully one recovers their sense of smell. So, if you're somebody that unfortunately has suffered a concussion, your sense of smell is one readout by which you might evaluate whether or not you're regaining some of your sensory performance. Of course, there will be others like balance, and cognition, and sleep, et cetera. But I'd like to refer you to a really nice paper which is entitled Olfactory Dysfunction in Traumatic Brain Injury: the Role of Neurogenesis the first author is Marin, M-A-R-I-N. The paper was published in Current Allergy and Asthma Report, this is 2020. I spent some time with this paper, it's quite good, it's a review article, I like reviews if they're peer-reviewed reviews and in quality journals. And what they discuss is and I'll just read here briefly 'cause they said it better than I could, "Olfactory functioning disturbances are common following traumatic brain injury, TBI, and can have a significant impact on the quality of life. Although there is no standard treatment for patients with the loss of smell." Now I'm paraphrasing, "Post-injury olfactory training has shown promise for beneficial effects. Some of this involves," they go on to tell us the role of dopamine, dopaminergic signaling, as I mentioned before, but what does this mean? This means that if you've had a head injury or repeated head injuries that enhancing your sense of smell is one way by which you can create new neurons. And now, you know how to enhance your sense of smell by interacting with things that have an odor very closely, and by essentially inhaling more, focusing on the inhale to wake up the brain and to really focus on some of the nuance of those smells. So, you might do for instance a smell test by which you smell something like a lemon, put it down, do 10 inhales or so, smell again, et cetera. You might also just take a more active role in trying to taste and smell your food, and taste and smell various things. I mean, please don't ingest anything that's poisonous that you're not supposed to be ingesting, but you know what I mean, really tuning up this system, I think is an excellent review, we're going to do an entire episode all about the use of the visual system in particular, but also the olfactory system for treatment of traumatic brain injury, as well as other methods. But I wanted to just mention it here because a number of people asked me about TBI. And here again, we're in this place where the senses and our ability to sense these chemicals through these two holes in the front of our face, our nostrils is a powerful readout and way to control brain function and nervous system function generally. Just a quick note about the use of smelling salts, I have a feeling that some of you may be interested in that and its application. If you are interested in that, I recommend you go to the scientific literature first rather than straight to some vendor or to the what do they call it these days? Costello bro science, he says, bro science, the bro science. You can go to this paper, which is excellent and is real science, which is Acute Effects of Ammonia Inhalants on Strength and Power Performance in Trained Men. It's a randomized controlled trial, it was published in the Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research in 2018, and it should be very easy to find. I will provide a link to the so-called PubMed ID, which is a string of numbers, and we'll put that in the caption if you want to go straight to that article, does show a significant what they call, this is what the words they use literally in quotes, "psyching up effect through the use of these ammonia inhalants and a significant increase in maximal force in force development in a variety of different movements." So, for those of you that are interested in ammonia inhalants, so-called smelling salts, that might be a good reference. The other thing I wanted to talk about with reference to odors is this myth which is that we don't actually smell things in our dreams, that we don't have a sense of smell. That's pure fiction, I don't know who came up with that, it's very clear that we are capable of smelling things in our sleep. However, when we are in REM sleep, rapid eye movement sleep, which is the sleep that predominates toward the second half of the night our ability to wake up in response to odors is diminished. It's not absent, but it's diminished. If smoke comes into the room, we will likely wake up if the concentration of smoke is high enough regardless of the stage of sleep we're in, but in REM sleep we tend to be less likely to smell, to sniff. And that actually was measured in a number of studies that sniffing in sleep is possible. So, if you put an odor like a lemon underneath someone's nostrils in the early portion of the night, they will smell, and they will later... They will sniff, excuse me, whether or not they smell or not, I guess depends on them and when they showered last, but they will definitely sniff and they will report later, especially if you wake them up soon after that, they had a dream or a percept of the scent of a lemon for instance. Later in the night, it's harder for that relationship to be established, it's likely that because of some of the paralysis associated with rapid eye movement sleep, which is a healthy paralysis, so-called sleep atonia, you don't want to act out your dreams in REM sleep that there is a less active tendency to sniff. And actually this has real clinical implications, the ability to sniff in response to the introduction of an odor is actually one way in which clinicians assess whether or not somebody's brain is so-called brain dead. That's not a nice term, but brain dead, or whether or not they have the capacity to recover from things like coma and other states of deep unconsciousness, or I guess you'd call it subconsciousness. So, what will happen is if someone has an injury and they're essentially out cold, the production of a sniffing reflex, or a sniffing response to say a lemon or some other odor presented below the nostrils is considered a sign that the brain is capable of waking up. Now, that's not always the case, but it's one indication. So just like you could use mechano sensation, so, a toe pinch for instance, you know, or scraping the bottom of somebody's barefoot to see if they're conscious, or shining light in their eyes, these are all things that you've seen in movies and television, or maybe if you've seen in real life as well. Well, odors and chemical sensing is another way by which you can assess whether or not the brain is capable of arousal. And actually olfactory stimulation is one of the more prominent ones that's being used in various clinics. As a last point about specific odors and compounds that can increase arousal and alertness, and this was simply through sniffing them not through ingesting them. There are data, believe it or not, there are good data on peppermint and the smell of peppermint, minty type sense, whether you like them or not will increase attention, and they can create the same sort of arousal response although not as intensely or as dramatically as ammonia salts can for instance. By the way, please don't go sniff real ammonia, you could actually damage your olfactory epithelium if you do that too close to the ammonia. If you're going to use smelling salts be sure you work with someone or you know what you're getting and how you're using this. You can damage your olfactory pathway in ways that are pretty severe, you can also damage your vision. If you've ever teared up because you inhaled something that was really noxious, that is not a good thing, it doesn't mean you necessarily cause damage, but it means that you have irritated the mucosal lining and possibly even the surfaces of your eyes, so please be very, very careful. Scents like peppermint, like these ammonia smelling salts, the reason they wake you up is because they trigger specific olfactory neurons that communicate with the specific centers of the brain, namely the amygdala and associated neurocircuitry and pathways that trigger alertness of the same sort that a cold shower or an ice bath, or a sudden surprise, or a stressful text message would evoke. Remember, the systems of your body that produce arousal, and alertness, and attention, and that cue you for optimal learning, aka focus. Those are very general mechanisms, they involve very basic molecules like adrenaline and epinephrin same thing actually, adrenaline and epinephrin. The number of stimuli, whether it's peppermint or ammonia, or a loud blast, the number of stimuli that can evoke that adrenaline response and that wake up response are near infinite. And that's the beauty of your nervous system, it was designed to take any variety of different stimuli placed them into categories, and then evoke different categories of very general responses. Now, you know a lot about olfaction and how the sense of smell works, here's another experiment that you can do. I'll ask you right now. Do you like, hate, or are you indifferent to the smell of microwave popcorn? Some people, including one member of my podcast staff says it's absolutely disgusting to them, they feel like it's completely nauseating. I don't mind it at all, in fact, I kind of like it. I think the smell of a microwave popcorn is kind of pleasant. I don't particularly like it, but it's certainly not unpleasant. Some people have a gene that makes them sensitive to the smell of things like microwave popcorn such that it smells like vomit. I probably don't have that gene because I find the smell of microwaved popcorn pretty pleasant. Some people hate the smell of cilantro, some people ingest asparagus, and when they urinate they can smell the asparagus in a very pungent way, other people can't smell it at all. These are variants in genes that encode for what are called olfactory receptors. Each olfactory sensory neuron expresses one odorant gene, one gene that codes for a receptor that responds to a particular odor. If you don't have that gene you will not respond to that odor. So, the reason why some people find the smell of microwave popcorn to be very noxious, putrid in fact, is because they have a gene that allows them to smell the kind of putrid odor within that. Other people who lack that gene just simply can't smell it, so we are not all the same with respect to our sensory experience. What one person finds delicious, another person might find disgusting. I'll give a good example which is that I absolutely despise Gorgonzola and blue cheese, absolutely despise it, it smells and tastes like dirty moldy socks to me. Some people love it, they crave it, actually, some people get a visceral response to it, and we will talk about how certain tastes can actually evoke very deep biological responses, even hormonal responses when we talk about taste in a few minutes. But there are these odors, for instance in popcorn it's the molecule 2-acetyl-1-pyrroline, not proline but pyrroline, that gives off to some people like me a toasted smell as the sugars in the kernels heat, but the compound is also found in things like white bread and jasmine rice, which don't have as pungent an odor, but some people smell that and it smells like cat urine. Now, there are scents like musky scents and musty scents that are secreted by animals like skunks and other animals of the so-called Mustelidae family. So, these would be ferrets and other animals that can spray in response to fear, or if they just want to mark a territory because they want to say that's mine. Dogs incidentally have scent glands that they rub on things, cats have them too. This musty odor, some people find actually quite pleasant, some people find it to be very noxious and that will depend of course on the concentration, right? I'll never forget the first time Costello got sprayed by a skunk and it was awful. I actually don't mind the smell of skunk at a distance, it's actually a little bit pleasant, I admit it's a little bit pleasant to me. I don't think that makes me too weird because if you ever read the book "All Quiet on the Western Front" about World War I, there's a description in there about the smell of skunk at a distance being mildly pleasant, so the author of that book probably shared a similar olfactory profile to me, or I to them rather, but some people find even the tiniest bit of the smell of skunk or musk to be noxious or awful. Now, of course in high concentrations, it's really awful. And unfortunately, poor Costello, he was like literally red-eyed and just snorting, and it was awful. There's a joke about dogs that says that dogs either get skunked one time and never again or 50 or a hundred times. Costello has been skunked no fewer, I'm not making this up, has been skunked no fewer than 103 times. And that's because if he sees something or hears something in the bushes, he just goes straight in, he does not learn. But if you like this, that musty scent or musky scent, well that says something about the genes that you express in your olfactory neurons, it is completely inherited. And if you don't like that scent, if it's really noxious or you have this response to microwave popcorn, well, that means you have a different compliment, a different constellation if you will of genes that make up for these olfactory sensory neurons and the receptors that they express. Let's talk about taste. Not whether or not you have taste or you don't have taste, there's no way for me to assess that, but rather how we taste things, meaning how we sense chemicals in food and in drink. There are essentially five, but scientists now believe there may be six things that we taste alone or in combination, they are sweet tastes, salty tastes, bitter tastes, sour tastes, and umami taste. Most of you probably heard of umami by now, it's U-M-A-M-I. Umami is actually the name for a particular receptor that you express on your tongue that detects savory tastes, so it's the kind of thing in braised meats. Sometimes people can even get the activation of umami by tomatoes or tomato sauces. What are each of these tastes and taste receptors responsible for? And then we'll talk about the sixth, maybe you can guess what it is, I don't know if you can guess it now. I couldn't guess it, but of the five tastes each one has a specific utility or function. Each one has a particular group of neurons in your mouth, in your tongue, believe it or not, that responds to particular chemicals and particular chemical structures. It is a total myth, complete fiction, that different parts of your tongue harbor different taste receptors. You know, that high school textbook diagram that you know sweet is in one part of the tongue and sour is in another, and bitters in another, complete fiction, just total fiction related to very old studies that were performed in a very poorly controlled way, no serious biologists and certainly no one that works on tastes would contend that that's the way that the taste receptors are organized, they are completely intermixed along your tongue. If you have heightened or decreased sensitivity to one of those five things I mentioned; sweet, salty, bitter, umami, or sour at one location in your tongue, it likely reflects the density of overall receptors or something going on in your brain, but not the differential distribution of those receptors. So, the sweet receptors are neurons that express a receptor that respond to sugars, in the same way that you have cones, photoreceptors, in your eye that respond to short, medium, or long wavelength light, meaning blueish, greenish, or reddish light. You have a neuron, or neurons plural, in your tongue that respond to sugars. And then those neurons, they don't say sweet, they don't actually send any sugar into the brain, they send what we call a volley, a barrage of action potentials of electrical signals off into the brain. It's an amazing system. So, all these receptors in your tongue make up what are called the neurons that give rise to a nerve, a collection of wires, nerve bundles of what's called the gustatory nerve, it goes from the tongue to the so-called nucleus of the solitary tract. And some of you requested names, I usually don't like to include too many names for sake of clarity, but the gustatory nerve from the tongue goes to the nucleus of the solitary tract and then to the thalamus and to insular cortex. You don't have to remember any of those names if you don't want to, but if you want mechanism, you want neural circuits, that's the circuit, gustatory nerve from the tongue, nucleus of the solitary tract in the brainstem, then the thalamus, and then insular cortex. And it is in insular cortex, this regenerate cortex that we sort out and make sense of and perceive the various tastes. Now, it's amazing because just taking a little bit of sugar or something sour like a little bit of lemon juice and touching it to the tongue within 100 milliseconds, right? Just 100 milliseconds, far less than one second, you can immediately distinguish ah, that's sour, that sweet, that's bitter, that's umami, and that's an assessment that's made by the cortex. Now, what to these different five receptors encode for? Well, sweet, salty, bitter, umami, sour, but what are they really looking for? What are they sensing? Well, sweet stuff signals the presence of energy, of sugars. And while we're all trying or we're told that we should eat less sugar for a variety of reasons, the ability to sense whether or not a food has rapid energy source or could give rise to glucose is essential so we have sweet receptors. The salty receptors, these neurons are trying to sense whether or not there are electrolytes in a given food or drink. Electrolytes are vitally important for the function of our nervous system, and for our entire body, sodium is what allows neurons to fire. What allows them to be electrically active. We also need potassium and magnesium, those are the ions that allow the neurons to be active. So the salty receptors, the reason that they are there is to make sure that we are getting enough, but not too much salt, we don't want to ingest things that are far too salty. Bitter receptors are there to make sure we don't ingest things that are poisonous. How do I know this? How can I say that? Even though I was definitely not consulted at the design phase, how can I say that? Well, the bitter receptors create a what we call labeled line, a unique trajectory to the neurons of the brainstem that control the [gags], the gag reflex. If we taste something very bitter it automatically triggers the gag reflex. Now, some people like bitter taste, I actually liked the taste of bitter coffee, children generally like sweet tastes more than bitter tastes, but even babies if they taste something bitter, they'll just immediately spit it up, it's like the gag reflex. Putrid smells will also evoke the same neurons, so some people are very sensitive, they have a very sensitive or low threshold vomit reflex, you're going to and there was somebody in my lab early on. And we never did this intentionally, and we're just laughing 'cause it was so dramatic. How we would have a discussion, someone would say something about something kind of gross, appropriate for the workplace, but nonetheless gross, we are biologists, would say something and they would say, "Stop, stop stop, I'm going to throw up." You know and some people have a very low threshold quick gag reflex. Other people don't, other people have a very stable stomach, they don't, you know, they rarely, if ever vomit. The umami receptor isn't sensing savory because the body loves savory, it's because savory is a signal for the presence of amino acids. And we'll talk more about this, but the presence of amino acids in our gut and in our digestive system, and the presence of fatty acids is essential, there is in fact, no essential carbohydrate or sugar. Now, I'm not a huge proponent of ketogenic diets nor am I against them, I think it's highly individual, you have to decide what's right for you, but everybody needs amino acids to survive, the brain needs them and we need fatty acids, especially to build a healthy brain during development, you need amino acids and fatty acids. And the sour receptor, why would we have a sour receptor? So, that we could have those really like sour candies? I think they've gotten more and more sour over the years. I admit I don't eat candy much, but I do have a particular weakness for like a really good really sour like gummy peach or they if the gummy cherries are dipped in whatever that sour powder, so I was a kid who I admit it, I liked the LIK-M-AID thing, I'd like drink the powder. Please don't do this, don't give this garbage to your kids, but I liked it, it was tasty, but sour receptors are not there so that you can ingest gummy sour gummy peaches or something like that, that's not why the system evolved, it's there and we know it's there to detect the presence of spoiled or fermented food. Fermented fruit has a sour element to it, and fermented things while certainly some fermented foods like sauerkraut, and kimchi, and things of that sort can be very healthy for us and are very healthy in reducing inflammation, there's great data on that, pro quality microbiome, et cetera. Fermented fruit can be poisonous, right? Alcohols are poisonous in many forms to our system and the sour receptor bearing neurons communicate to an area of the brainstem that evokes the pucker response, closing of the eyes and essentially shutting of the mouth, and cringing away. I think cringe is like a thing now, my niece, whenever I seem to say something or do something it's either an eye-roll, a cringe, or both in combination. So the sour, the sweet, the salty, the bitter, and the umami system, were not there so that we could have this wonderful pallet of foods that we enjoy so much, they'll allow us to do that, but they're there to make sure that we bring in certain things to our system and that we don't ingest other things. Now, what's the sixth sense within the taste system? Not sixth sense generally, but within the taste system. What's this putative possible sixth receptor? I already kind of hinted at it when I talked about fatty acids, there are now data to support the idea although there's still more work that needs to be done that we also have receptors on our tongue that sense fat. And that because fat is so vital for the function of our nervous system and the other organs of our body that we are sensing the fat content in food, maybe this is why I can only eat half, but no less than half of a jar of almond butter or peanut butter in one sitting. I just can't, unless it's not salted, in which case, it makes no sense to me. But it's remarkable how that texture, and also the flavor, but that texture of fat. I love butter, I am guilty, and Costello is definitely guilty of eating pats of butter from time to time, I have no guilt about this. People eat pats of cheese, why shouldn't we eat a pat of butter? If you think that's gross then maybe I have a greater abundance of the fat receptors in my tongue, maybe I have a fat tongue than you do. But nonetheless, the ability to sense fat here in our mouth seems to be critical, you can imagine why that is. I want to talk about the tongue and the mouth as an extension of your digestive tract. I know that might not be pleasant to think about, but when you look at it through the lens that I'm about to provide, it will completely change the way you think about the gut brain and about all the stuff that you've heard in these recent years about oh, we have this second brain, it's all these neurons in our gut, I've been chuckling through these last few years as people have gotten so excited about the gut brain, not because of their excitement, I think that excitement is wonderful, but we always knew that the nervous system extended out of the brain and into the body, and people seem kind of overwhelmed and surprised by the idea that we have neurons in our gut that can sense things like sugars and fatty acids. And I think those are beautiful discoveries, don't get me wrong. Diego Bohorquez's lab out of Duke University has done beautiful studies showing that within the mucosal lining of our gut we have neurons that sense fatty acids, sugars, and amino acids, and that when we ingest something that contains one or two or three of those things, there's a signal sent via the vagus nerve up into what's called the nodose ganglion, N-O-D-O-S-E, and then into the brain where it secretes dopamine which makes us want more of that thing, it makes us more motivated to pursue and eat more of that thing, that's either fatty, or umami, savory, or has a sweet taste, any one or two or three of those qualities, independent of the taste. Now, I think those are beautiful data, but we know that this thing, the mouth. And for those of you listening I've just got my couple of fingers in my mouth, that's why I sound like I've got something in my mouth. This thing in the front of our face, we use it for speaking, but it is the front of our digestive tract. We are essentially a series of tubes and that tube starts with your mouth and heads down into your stomach. And so, that you would sense so much of the chemical constituents of the stuff that you might bring into your body or that you might want to expel and not swallow or not interact with by being able to smell is it putrid? Does it smell good? Does it taste good? Is this safe? Is it salty? Is it so sour that it's fermented and it's going to poison me? Is it so bitter that it could poison me? Is it so savory that, mmm, yes. I want more and more of this. Well, then you'd want to trigger dopamine, that's all starting in the mouth. So, you have to understand that you were equipped with this amazing chemical sensing apparatus, we call your mouth and your tongue. And those little bumps on your tongue that they call the papillae, those are not your taste buds. Surrounding those little papillae like little rivers are these little dents and indentations. And what dents and indentations do in a tissue is they allow more surface area, they allow you to pack more receptors. So, down in those grooves are where all these little neurons and their little processes are with these little receptors for sweet, salty, bitter, umami, sour, and maybe fat as well. And so, it's this incredible device that you've been equipped with, that you can use to interact with various components of the outside world and decide whether or not you want to bring them in or not. Just as you can lose those olfactory neurons, if you happen to get hit on the head or you have some other thing, maybe it was an infection that caused loss of those olfactory sensory neurons, you can also lose taste receptors in your mouth. If you've ever eaten something that's too hot, not spicy hot, but too hot, you burn your tongue, you burn receptors. It takes about a week to recover those receptors. For some people it's a little bit more quickly, but if you burn your tongue badly by ingesting a soup that's too hot or a beverage that's too hot, you will greatly reduce your sense of taste for essentially all tastes. And that's because those neurons sit very shallow beneath the tongue's surface, and so that if you put something too hot on, you literally just burn those neurons away. Luckily those neurons also can replenish themselves. Those neurons are of the peripheral nervous system, and like all peripheral system neurons they can replenish or regenerate. So, if you burn your mouth in about a week or so hopefully sooner you'll be able to taste again. In fact, everybody's ability to taste is highly subject to training. You can really enhance your ability to taste and taste the different component parts of different foods simply by paying attention to what you're trying to taste, this is an amazing aspect of the taste system. I think more than any other system, the taste system and perhaps the smell system as well can be trained so that you can learn to pick out the tones, if you will of different ice cream, or different beverages. I'm somebody who, you know, I don't drink much alcohol, I'll occasionally have a drink or something, but a while ago I got to taste a bunch of different white tequilas, these are different kinds of tequilas that are, they're not brown, they're white. And I sort of assumed that all tequila was disgusting, that was my assumption before doing this. And then I tasted a couple of white tequilas and I realized oh, those aren't aren't too bad. I tasted a few more, and then pretty soon I could really start to detect the nuance and the difference. Now, I haven't had a tequilas in a long time, now I sort of tend to not drink at all these days, but in a very short period of time like a couple of days I got very good at detecting which things I liked and I could start to pick out tones. So, I'm not a wine drinker, but for those of you that are, you know, you hear about oh, it has floral tones, or berry tones, or chocolate tones. You know, some of that is just kind of menu-based and kind of marketing-based silliness designed to get you excited about what you're about to ingest. But some of it is real, and for people that are skilled in assessing wines or assessing foods. I'm much more of an eater than a drinker, you can really start to develop a sensitive palate, a nuanced palette through what we call top-down mechanisms. This olfactory cortex that takes these five, maybe the sixth fat receptor too, information and tries to make sense of what's out there in the world. And what its utility is, is it good? Is it bad? Do I want more of it or less than it? That neural circuitry is unlike other neural circuitry in that it seems very amenable to behavioral plasticity for whatever reason, and we could talk about what those reasons might be. You know, it's interesting sometimes to think about how your taste literally, chemical taste, is probably very different than that of other people, how a food tastes to you is probably very different than how it tastes to somebody else. The same probably cannot be said of something like vision or hearing, unless you're somebody who has perfect pitch or your color vision is disrupted, or you're a mantis shrimp, chances are when we look at the same object two people are seeing more or less the same object or perceiving it in a very similar way. There are experiments that essentially establish that. Now we, have taste receptors and a lot of those tastes receptors, their chemical structures are known, they come with fancy names like the T1R1 or the T1R2, which were identified as the sweet and umami receptors. So, what's interesting is that this umami flavor is the savory flavor rather that's sensed by umami receptors is very close to the receptor that detects sweet things. Similarly, bitter is sensed by a whole other set of receptors. Now, there's a fun naturally occurring experiment that will forever change the way that you look at animals, and the way certainly that I think about dogs and Costello in particular. Carnivorous large animals like tigers and some grizzly bears for instance, we know that they have no ability to detect sweet, they don't actually have the receptors for sweet on their tongue, but their concentration of umami receptors of their ability to detect savory is at least 5,000 times that which it is in humans. In other words, if I eat a little piece of steak, or Costello eats a little piece of steak, that steak probably tastes much, much more savory than it does to me. So dogs, and tigers, and bears, et cetera, they're going to taste savory things and smell savory things with a much higher degree of sensitivity, but they can't taste sweet things. Other large animals, which are mostly herbivores like the panda bear for instance. It's hard to believe that thing is even a bear, I got nothing against pandas, I just think that they get a little bit too much of the limelight frankly. So, no vendetta against Panda, save the pandas, I hope they replenish all the pandas, but pandas in all their whatever have no umami receptors, they can't taste savory, but they have greatly heightened density of sweet receptors. So, there they are eating these whatever bamboos all day or not bamboozle, but bamboos all day and they can taste things that are very sweet with a much higher degree of intensity. And in general, animals that are more gentle that are herbivores, excuse me. Or animals that have the propensity for aggression, that's where you really see the divergence of the umami receptor because it's associated with meat and amino acids. And where you see the enhancement of the sweet receptors for animals that eat a lot of plants and fruits, and they probably taste very different to them than they do to you and me. And, so it's interesting to note that animals that eat meat, that eat other organisms can actually extract more savory experience from that. What does this mean for you? All right, do you associate yourself as a tiger, or a grizzly bear, or a panda, or a combination of both? Most people are omnivores. However, you may find it interesting that people that for instance eat a pure carnivore type diet or a keto diet where they are ingesting a lot of meat, so therefore are sensing a lot of umami flavors. And I realized not everyone who's keto eats meat, but those who do that will develop a more sensitive palate and likely there are some data, although early data, craving for umami-like foods. Whereas people that eat a more plant-based diet are likely developing a heightened sensitivity and desire for, and maybe even dopamine response to sugars and plant-based foods. Now, this is my partial attempt to reconcile the kind of online battle that seems to exist between plant-based versus animal-based, purely plant-based or purely animal-based diets. I think most people are omnivores, but it's kind of interesting to think that the systems are plastic such that people might want more meat if they eat more meat, people might want more plants if they eat enough plants for a long period of time. And this might explain some of the chasm that exists between these two groups. Now, this is not to say anything about the ethical or the environmental impacts of different things, I don't even want to get into that because the meat people say that the plant-based diets have as much a negative impact as the plant people say that the meat based diets, that's a totally different discussion. What I'm talking about here is food craving and food seeking and one's ability to detect these umami, savory flavors is going to be enhanced by ingesting more meat and less activation of the sweet receptors. So in other words, the more meat you eat the more you're going to become like a tiger, so to speak. And the more that you avoid these umami flavors and meats and the more that you would eat plant-based foods and in particular sweet foods, the more you will likely suppress that umami system and that you will have a heightened desire for, appetite for and sensing of sweet foods or foods that contain sugars. What I'm about to tell you is going to seem crazy, but is extremely interesting with respect to taste and taste receptors. Remember, even though we can enjoy food and we can evolve our sense of what's tasty or not tasty, depending on life decisions, environmental changes, et cetera, the taste system just like the olfactory system and the visual system was laid down for the purpose of moving towards things that are good for us and moving away from things that are bad for us, that's the kind of core function of the nervous system. Well, taste receptors are not just expressed on the tongue, they are expressed in other cells and other tissues as well. Some of you may be able to imagine foods that are so delicious to you that they make your entire body feel good. Or foods that are so horrifically awful to think about let alone taste, that they create a whole body shuddering or kind of repellent-type response where you just either cringe or turn your face away even in the absence of that food. That's sort of how I feel about pungent, Gorgonzola cheese. If you like Gorgonzola cheese, I don't judge you, I just, that's an individual difference. I happen to love certain foods, I do like savory foods very much. I, when I think about them, they just they make me feel good. And I'm oftentimes not even associating with the taste of those foods, it feels almost like a visceral thing. Well, it turns out that some of the taste receptors extend beyond the tongue, that they actually can extend into portions of the gut and digestive system. And if that's not strange enough, turns out that some of the taste receptors are actually expressed on the ovaries and the testes. So, what that means is that the gonads, the very cells, and tissues, and organs in our body that make up the reproductive axis are expressing taste receptors. Okay, so how do we interpret this? Does this mean that when you eat something that's very savory or very sweet for instance, that it's triggering activation of the ovaries or of the testes? Well, it's possible. Now, how those molecules, those chemical molecules would actually get there isn't clear, the digestive track does not run directly to the testes or to the ovaries. But nonetheless, what this means is that chemical sensing of the very things that we detect on our tongue and that we call taste in quotes in food is also evoking cellular responses within the reproductive gonads. Now, whether or not this underlies the positive association that we have with certain foods isn't clear, but I'd be remiss if I didn't point out the obvious, which is that the relationship between the sensual nature of particular foods and sensuality generally and the reproductive axis is something that's been covered in many movies, there are entire movies that are focused on the relationship between for instance, chocolate and love and reproductive behaviors, or certain feasts of meat and their wonderful tastes and the kind of sensuality around feasts of different types of foods, but in general, it's the sweet and the savory, rarely is it the sour or the bitter, the salty or the fat. And not surprisingly perhaps, it is the T2Rs and the T1Rs, the receptors that are associated with the sweet and with the umami, the savory flavors that are expressed not just on the tongue and in portions of the digestive tract, but on the gonads themselves. So, what does this mean? Does this mean that eating certain foods can stimulate the gonads? Maybe, there's no data that immediately support that right now, but this is an emerging area. If you'd like to read more about this there's a great review, entitled Taste perception: From the tongue to the testis, although they do also talk about the ovaries. Why they didn't include that in the title is I think a reflection of the bias of the author. The author indeed not incidentally is Feng Li, last name L-I. It's a very interesting paper published in Molecular Human Reproduction. You can find it easily online, it's downloadable, I'll also provide a link to it. I just think it's fascinating that these taste receptors are expressed in other tissues. And I should mention that they're expressed in tissues of other areas of the body as well, including the respiratory system, but the richest aggregation or concentration of these receptors for umami and sweet of course is on the tongue, but also on the gonads. And I think it does speak to the possible bridge between what we think of as a sensory or a sensual experience of food and the deeper kind of visceral sense within the gut, and maybe even within the gonads as well of something that we find extremely pleasurable, or even appetitive that we want to move toward it. We are actually going to return to that general theme in the discussion about touch sensation. Some people for instance, when they touch certain surfaces like furs, or sheep skins, or velvet, or soft, smooth surfaces it feels good elsewhere in their body, not just at the point of contact with that surface. And similarly, if there's the... How about this one? The screech of chalk on a chalkboard, it's a sound, but it has a very strong visceral component, or sandpaper, like fingernails on a chalkboard, not the sound, but the feeling, right? Exactly, so our whole nervous system is tuned to either be drawn toward appetitive, or repelled by aversive behaviors, right? So there's this push-pull that exists, and what I'm referring to in terms of these receptors on the tongue that are also expressed on the gonads is yet another example of what at least in this case seems to be an appetitive thing, a desire to move toward certain foods and maybe even the experiences that are associated with those foods. I want to talk about a particular aspect of food and a chemical reaction in cooking called the Maillard reaction. Some of you have probably heard of the Maillard reaction, it's spelled M-A-I-L-L-A-R-D. The D is silent, so don't call it the Maillard reaction, and it's not the Maillard reaction, it is the Maillard reaction. And the Maillard reaction is a reaction that for the aficionados is a non-enzymatic browning. The other form of non-enzymatic browning is caramelization, although when you hear caramel, carmel, I think it's caramel. You think sweet, and indeed caramelization is a sugar-sugar chemical interaction that leads to a kind of nicely toasted not burnt, but nicely toasted sweet taste. Whereas the Maillard reaction is that really savory reaction that occurs when you have a sugar amino acid reaction. Remember, we have neurons in our gut, but also neurons in our tongue and neurons deep in the brain that are comparing the amount of sugar to savory. Okay, and the Maillard reaction is very interesting for you chemists out there, this is going to be way too elementary. And for you non-chemists it's probably going to be a little bit of a reach, but just bear with me, all these chemicals that we sense have a different structure, it's like hydrogens, and oxygens, and aldehyde groups, and all these things. And basically the Maillard reaction involves what's called a free aldehyde. If you didn't like chemistry, don't worry about it, it's basically got a group there that kind of sits open that allows it to interact with other things and actually through the use of heat and the process that we call brazing, which I'll talk about in a moment you create a what's called a ketone group. Now, most people now have heard of ketones 'cause they think about the ketogenic diet, but a ketone group is actually a chemical compound that can be used for energy, and that's why people say you can use ketones for energy, but if you've ever actually encountered ketones, if you for instance, get liquid ketones, a ketone ester, and you smell it, what does it smell like? It smells a little bit like an alcohol, but it has a kind of savory taste, even when you smell it. Okay, there are other smells that have these tastes too, but for the Maillard reaction which could be created for instance like if you took a piece of meat, or if you're not a meat eater if you took tomatoes and you cook them in a pan and you cooked it nice and slow till it's simmered and almost started to brown and burn a little bit. Usually if I do it burns, I'm not a good cook as Costello points out a lot, but it gets that like almost tangy, very umami-like flavor. And sometimes it will even stick to the pan, if you scrape it off and actually you can taste it in your mouth as you're cooking it. That's the Maillard reaction, that's that free aldehyde group, and that's the production of a ketone group. When you smell ketones, it smells very much like that. Okay, some people talk about the ketones will produce like fruity breath. And that's true if people are really far into ketosis, their breath has a kind of fruity odor, that's a little bit of a different thing. So, the relationship between smell and taste is a very, very close one. And this is why when people drink wine they often will inhale and then sip, some of that is just kind of like pomp and circumstance frankly, they make a big deal of it, but they can sense things with their mouth. The combination of odor receptors being activated in a particular way, and taste receptors in the mouth being activated in a particular way, triggers the activation of multiple brain areas that are associated with taste, and circuitry within the body that's associated with the behaviors that relate to that taste like leaning toward it, or leaning away from it depending on whether or not it's appetitive or aversive. So the Maillard reaction is a very interesting reaction involving this sugar amino acid thing, but really it's what it's doing is heating up food such that the amino acids are more available literally in their chemical form for detection by the neurons. This is a phenomenon that occurs in other domains of the taste system. For instance, a lot of what's happened with highly processed foods is that manufacturers have figured out how to trigger more dopamine response by ingestion of these sugary foods and created textures, and created essentially design of foods for two purposes. I'm not out to completely demonize processed food, I did that in a previous episode, but processed foods are really designed to take foods that ordinarily would spoil, that would have a shelf life and extend their shelf life to turn foods which are not a commodity into a commodity. Something could be stored and used essentially as a tradable purchasable, sellable resource. In doing that they change, they've also decided to change the texture so that you want to chew more of them. Like I have this thing I don't know what it is for those Triscuit crackers. I don't know why are those things so good? It's probably the texture, got those layers, they're just kind of perfectly salty. I haven't had one in a long time, so I bet if I had one now it wouldn't taste as good as I'm imagining it. But those combinations of texture, smell, and taste are what combine to activate these different brain areas that make you really want to desire something. And the people who make foods, processed foods in particular, are phenomenally good at figuring out what drives the dopamine system and makes you want more of these things either because of the way they taste and/or because of the way they trigger neurons in your gut that have nothing to do with taste that simply make you desire more of the food. In other words, many of the foods that are processed foods make you desire more of them, it's impossible to eat one chip kind of thing. Not because they taste good, but because in your gut they're activating the neurons that activate dopamine which make you seek more of those foods independent of blood sugar or anything else. So, you may actually be eating more particular foods not because they taste good, but because they feel good on your tongue and mouth, and because the neurons in your gut which are totally independent of conscious taste are triggering the release of dopamine which is a molecule that makes you seek more of, and do more of anything that led to the ingestion of that food. There's a fun experiment that you can do, which is to completely invert your sense of sweet and sour, there's actually a way to do this readily. When I was a post-doc, I used to have a journal club at my house, people would come over in the evening once a month, and we would read a paper, typically the weirdest paper we could find and we would eat food and hang out, that's what nerds did and do for fun, so that's what we did. And one time someone brought what's called miracle berry. Okay, so this isn't some psychedelic plant medicine thing, miracle berry, you can purchase online, it's relatively inexpensive. It actually causes a change in the configuration of taste receptors such that when you eat something sour, it tastes sweet. And so what's really wild is you ingest miracle berry, and then you bite into a lemon, maybe even the lemon and peel and it tastes as sweet as a peach. And this effect lasts several hours. Definitely, you know, check any warnings, I don't know what sort of warnings these, a miracle berry carries, but I'm sure there's always something, you can imagine. There are a number of papers on miracle berry or miracle fruit it's called, but it changes your perception of sour at a perceptual level, but it does that by changing the activity of the receptors in the mouth and tongue. Now, this is important as a principle and it's underscored by experiments that have been done by for instance Charles Zuker's lab at Columbia University, where they've essentially genetically engineered animals such that the bitter receptor is swapped with the sweet receptor, or the sweet receptor is swapped with the bitter receptor. And what they show is that the actual food, the experience on the tongue drives different pathways in the brain. Here's what they did, they essentially took mice and swapped out the sweet receptor and put in a bitter receptor. And then what they found is that whereas normally mice would actively seek out and even work for sugar water, sucrose, they really like that. If they replace the sweet receptor with the bitter receptor, the mice would avoid sugar water. And the reverse was also true, that mice would drink a bitter solution avidly, they liked a bitter solution if they swapped out the bitter receptor for sweet receptor. What this means is that our entire experience of what we taste is dependent on how we experience that taste the level of the tongue. And so, you're hopefully not going to do genetic engineering of your taste receptors, but if you'd like to do this sort of experiment you actually can do it very easily using miracle fruit, the instructions of how much to ingest, et cetera, any safety concerns are usually on the package and should be easy to find. And there's a lot of science to support how this works, it's kind of a fun experiment that anyone can do and will completely change your perception of any food that you're accustomed to eating. In fact, you can figure out how much sweet or the sense of sweetness is contributing to your experience of a food, even if you don't think of it as a sweet food through this miracle fruit experiment. You could take miracle fruit, you could eat a slice of pepperoni pizza or cheese pizza, which perhaps normally to you would taste just like pizza, and you'll notice it tastes very different. What you are detecting is how much the sense of sweet was contributing to that particular flavor. Now, I'd like to return to pheromones. As I mentioned earlier, true pheromonal effects are well-established in animals. And one of the most remarkable pheromone effects that's ever been described is one that actually I've mentioned before on this podcast, but I'll mention again just briefly, which is the Coolidge effect. The Coolidge effect is the effect of a male of a given species, in most cases, it tended to be a rodent or a rooster mating. And at some point reaching exhaustion or the inability to mate again because they just simply couldn't for whatever reason. The Coolidge effect establishes that if you swap out the hen with a new hen, or the female rat or mouse with a new one then the rat or the rooster spontaneously regains their ability to mate, somehow their vigor is returned, the refractory period after mating that normally occurs is abolished and they can mate again. It turns out that the Coolidge effect runs in the opposite direction too. I did not know this, but I recently learned of a study, it was actually done in hamsters, not in in mice, but it turns out that females also will, female rodents will mate to exhaustion. And at some port... At some point, excuse me, they will refuse to mate any longer unless you swap in a new male. And then because mating in rodents involves the female being receptive, there are certain number of behaviors that mean that tell you that she's willing and wanting to mate, so-called lordosis reflex. Then if there's a new male, she will spontaneously regain the lordosis reflex and the desire to mate. And how do you know this? How do we know it's a pheromonal effect? Well, this recovery of the desire and ability to mate both in males and in females can be evoked completely by the odor of a new male or female, it doesn't even have to be the presentation of the actual animal. And that's how you know that it's not some visual interaction or some other interaction, it's a pheromonal interaction. Now, as I mentioned earlier, pheromonal effects in humans have been debated for a long period of time. We are thought to have a vestigial, meaning a kind of shrunken down miniature accessory olfactory bulb called Jacobson's organ, or the vomeronasal organ. Some people don't believe that Jacobson's organ exists, some people do, there is anatomical evidence for it in some cadavers. It sits not very high up in the brain or where your olfactory bulb is, but it's actually in the nasal passages, so there's like little dents as you go up through your nasal passages, and there is evidence of something that's vomeronasal-like. Vomeronasal is the pheromonal organ, they call it Jacobson's organ if it's present in humans, kind of tucked into some of the divots in the nasal passage. Even if that organ, Jacobson's organ isn't there or is not responsible for the chemical signaling between individuals, there is chemical signaling between human beings. As I mentioned earlier, the effect of tears in suppressing the areas of the brain that are involved in sexual desire and testosterone of males, that's a concrete result, that's a very good result published by an excellent group with no pre-existing bias going in, that's just what they found. There is also evidence both for and against chemical signaling between females in terms of synchronization of menstrual cycles. Now, the original paper on this was published in the 1970s by McClintock, and it essentially said that when women live together in group housing, dormitories, and similar that their menstrual cycles were synchronized and that was due to what was hypothesized to be pheromonal effects. Over the years, that study has been challenged many, many times. The more recent data point to the idea that there is chemical-chemical signaling between women in ways that impact the timing of the menstrual cycle, but that depending on whether or not some of the women are in the ovulation phase, the ovulatory phase of that cycle or whether or not they are in the follicular phase, the phase when the follicle is maturing before the egg actually obviates. So two separate phases of the 28 day menstrual cycle will either lengthen or shorten the menstrual cycle of the person that smells those women. Translated into English what that means is that it is very likely it seems that something, maybe pheromones, but maybe some other chemical that is independent of pheromones is being conveyed between women that are housed together or spend a lot of time together to shift their menstrual cycle, but it doesn't necessarily mean that they synchronize. So for instance, if one woman is in the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle, it might shorten or delay ovulation. Excuse me, it might accelerate ovulation in another woman, whereas if somebody is in the ovulatory phase of their cycle, it might lengthen the menstrual cycle out so that they, the woman who smells that person's scent or who smells her sweat, we still don't know the origin of the chemical would ovulate later. So, all of this is to say is that chemical-chemical signaling is happening from females to males through tears, we know that. Is that a pheromonal effect? Well, by the strict definition of a pheromone, a molecule that's released from one individual that impacts the biology of another individual, yes. But in terms of identifying what the pheromone is in tears, that's still unknown, it's not clear what the chemical compound is. So, we're reluctant as scientists to call it a true pheromonal effect. The menstrual cycle and the synchronization of the menstrual cycle effect seems to hold up under some conditions. But in some cases, there's a kind of clash of menstrual cycles that's created by chemicals that are emitted from one female to another. So, there are many examples of this in humans, for instance, people can recognize the t-shirt of their mate. If you give... This experiment has been done many times, I know it's been challenged a number of times, but the data are pretty good by now that if you offer, you take a collection of women who are in stable relationships with somebody, you offer them the smell of a hundred different shirts and they can very readily pick out their significant others scent. Okay, that's pure olfaction, that's not pheromonal, but nonetheless is a remarkable degree of discrimination, olfactory discrimination. You can dilute their partner's scent down to the point where they themselves can't consciously detect the difference between the sweat or the t-shirt of a hundred different t-shirts or so, they might say, "I don't really smell the difference, but I think it's this one. Yeah, this one belongs to the person that I've been with." And they are much greater than chance at detecting the t-shirt or identifying the t-shirt correctly. So, there's no question really that there is chemical-chemical signaling between humans, the question is whether or not it's truly pheromonal in basis. Now, you'll notice that a lot of the examples I gave aside from the one of tears is women detecting the scents of men or of other women. And it turns out that there are a number of papers, the best one I think that I could find is published in Physiology and Behavior in 2009, it's a review entitled Sex Differences and Reproductive Hormone Influences on Human Odor Perception by Doty, D-O-T-Y, and Cameron. I encourage you to check out this review it's available free as a download, we'll provide a link to it, you can get the full PDF if you want. But it does seem that women are better at detecting odors in these odor discrimination tasks than are men. And yes, that it does vary according to where they are in their menstrual cycle. And yes, they also looked at people who had received gonadectomy, they had their ovaries removed, a number of different important controls. None of this surprises me, none of this should surprise you, it's very clear that hormones have a profound effect on enlarge number of systems in our biology and that smell, and taste, and the ability to sense the chemical states of others, either consciously or subconsciously have a profound influence on whether or not we might want to spend time with them, whether or not this is somebody that we're pair bonded with, whether or not this is somebody that we just met and don't trust yet, things of this sort. And given what's at stake in terms of reproductive biology, not just offspring, but given the possibility of transmission of diseases, et cetera, you know, the risks of childbirth, et cetera. It makes so much sense that much of our biology is wired toward detecting and sensing whether or not things and people are things that we should approach or avoid, whether or not reproduction with that person is the appropriate response or suppression of the reproductive response is the appropriate response, right? As in that's the case with the tears. So, I think these are fascinating studies, it's an area that still needs a lot of work, but there are some really wonderful papers on this. And the one that I mentioned a few minutes ago, Sex Differences and Reproductive Hormone Influences on Human Odor Perception is one of the better reviews that are out there. There are also a number of other reviews for instance that talk about pheromone effects and their impact on mood, and sexual responses, and things of that sort, and we will also provide some links to those. A lot of this is still speculative, but I want to say I know I said it three times, what I really want to underscore because it is vitally important, and people seem to get a little triggered by the notion of pheromones. Just because we haven't identified the actual chemical compound that's acting as a pheromone or putative pheromone does not mean that chemical-chemical signaling between individuals doesn't exist, clearly it does. Actually, you and every other human from the time you're born until the time you die are actively seeking out and sensing and evaluating the chemicals that come from other individuals. There's a really nice study that was done by the Weizmann Institute, a group there, I think it was also Noam Sobel's group, but another group as well as I recall looking at human-human interactions when they meet for the first time. It's a remarkable study because what they found was people would reach out and shake hands. It's is a typical response, you know pre-pandemic, people would meet, they'd reach out and they would shake hands. And what they observed was almost every time within just a few seconds of having shaken hands with this new individual, people will touch their eyes almost without fail. Occasionally, they would touch their eyebrow, occasionally someone would touch their hair. We always associate that with people having some sort of... Or us having some sort of self-conscious response like oh, we want to make sure shirt tucked in and all prim and proper, whatever it is, or looking right, is there something you're like teeth? This kind of thing, but actually people are doing that even if the person they just met left the room. So, someone's sitting there, someone comes in, they shake hands, and the person inevitably subconsciously touches their eyes. They are taking chemicals from the skin contact and they are placing it on a mucosal membrane of some sort, typically not up to their nose or in their mouth, typically on their eyes. Now, animals do this all the time, there's a phenomenon in animals called bunting. If you have a overeager dog that when you meet them or you see them again after you've been away for the day they'll rub their head against you, right? Cats will do this too, it's called bunting, they're rubbing their scent glands on you, they're marking you. And believe it or not, you're marking other people when you shake their hand, and they are then taking your mark and rubbing it on themselves subconsciously. So, we all do these kinds of behaviors, and now that you're aware of it you can watch for it in your environment, you can pay attention to people. Some of this has probably changed in light of the events of 2020, et cetera, but nonetheless, we are evaluating the molecules on people's breath, we are evaluating the molecules on people's skin by actively rubbing it on ourselves. And we are actively involved in sensing not just their facial expressions, the size of their pupils, and things like that, but the chemicals that they are emitting, their hormone status, how they smell. We're detecting the pheromones possibly, but certainly the odors in their breath. You might say, "Well, I don't actually go around sniffing people's breath. I don't, you know, unless if it's bad," in which case it's aversive, but breath is communicating a lot of signals. And this handshake eye rub experiment shows that we are actively going through behaviors reflexively to wipe ourselves or smear ourselves with other people's chemicals. Now, that might seem odd or even gross to you, but I think it's beautiful, I think that it illustrates the extent to which we as human beings are in some ways among the other animals in our subconscious, sometimes conscious, but certainly subconscious tendency to try and evaluate our chemical environment through what we inhale through our nose, what we ingest through our mouth, and what we actively take off other people's skin and rub on ourselves to evaluate it and what we should do about it, and perhaps that person as well. So today, we talked a lot about olfaction taste and chemical sensing between individuals. I'd like to think that you now know a lot about how your smell system works and why inhaling is a really good thing to do in general for waking up your brain, and for cognitive function, and for enhancing your sense of smell. We talked about how to enhance your sense of taste, and we talked about chemical signaling between individuals as a way of communicating some important aspects about biology. People are shaping each other's biology all the time by way of these chemicals that are being traded from one body to the next through air, and skin to skin contact, and tears. If you're enjoying this podcast and you're finding the information useful please subscribe on YouTube, that's one of the best ways to support us. You can also put any questions you have and feedback in the comment section on YouTube. If you don't already subscribe on Apple and Spotify, you can support us by subscribing on Apple and Spotify. And on apple, you get the opportunity to leave us a review up to five stars, If you think we deserve five stars please give us a five star review. In any case, you can leave us comments there. And we are also very active on Instagram, @hubermanlab on Instagram is where I post yes, clips from the podcast, but also additional new and original content, and you have the opportunity to put your questions in the comment section below those posts as well. I do read all the comments on YouTube, on Apple, and also on Instagram. We have a website hubermanlab.com where all the podcasts are housed with links to YouTube, Apple, and Spotify as well as downloadable links, everything's zero cost of course. And there, you can also find any links to additional resources that we might post. As well, please check out our sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning of each podcast episode, those sponsors are the way that we are able to bring zero cost to consumer information about all these topics to you each week. And we also have a Patreon, it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman, and there you can support us at any level that you like. Today, we didn't really talk about supplements, but previous episodes and in future episodes we'll talk about supplements and things that you can take to modify your biology and nervous system if you like. We've partnered with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E, because Thorne has the highest levels of stringency with respect to the amounts of given compounds that are in their supplements, and the quality and purity of those compounds. If you go to Thorne, thorne.com/u/huberman, you can see all the supplements that I take and get 20% off any of those supplements as well as any of the other supplements that Thorne makes, you just go to thorne.com/u/huberman. And if you enter their website through that portal you get 20% off any of their things at checkout. Last but not least, I want to thank you for your time and attention, and your willingness to embrace new concepts and terms, and to learn about science and biology, and protocols that hopefully can benefit you and the people that you know, and of course thank you for your interest in science. [gentle music]

========================================

--- Video 323 ---
Video ID: ObtW353d5i0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ObtW353d5i0
Title: The Science of Vision, Eye Health & Seeing Better
Published: 2021-06-14 12:00:08 UTC
Description:
This episode I describe how we see, meaning how our eyes focus, convert  light information into electricity the rest of the brain can understand and how our brain  creates the incredible thing we experience as “sight”. I also describe how we can train and support our visual system to improve at any age. I describe more than a dozen protocols to support depth perception, offset near-sightedness, improve mood, sleep, and our ability to focus (both visual focus and our mental focus generally). I also explain how to use eyesight to improve our levels of alertness and why visual hallucinations, lazy eyes and colorblindness occur. I also describe various compounds that may assist in supporting visual health and possibly improve our vision. Many simple, zero-cost protocols and a lot of scientific mechanisms are covered in this episode in clear language anyone can understand-- it is for anyone that values their brain and their eyesight, whether young, adult-age or advanced age. 

Some Huberman Lab podcast sponsors may have changed, so please visit our website for the current list: https://www.hubermanlab.com/sponsors

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Link to eye exercise videos for smooth pursuit, amblyopia, etc. 
(Numbering of videos does correspond to numbers in episode caption.)
https://www.youtube.com/c/VisualExercises/videos

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introduction 
00:04:51 Protocol: Concurrent Training For Endurance, Strength, Hypertrophy 
00:07:24 The Senses, Vision, Seeing & What We Should All Do To See Better  
00:10:35 Our Eyes: What They Really Do, & How They Work 
00:14:30 Converting Light Into Electricity Language: Photoreceptors, Retinal Ganglion Cells   
00:17:00 We Don’t See Anything Directly: It Is All A Comparison Of Reflected Light 
00:19:35 Dogs, Cats, Snakes, Squirrels, Shrimps, Diving Birds, & You(r View Of The World) 
00:24:05 Everything You See Is A Best Guess, Blind Spots 
00:25:50 Depth Perception 
00:28:00 Subconscious Vision: Light, Mood, Metabolism, Dopamine; Frog’s Skin In Your Eyes 
00:32:00 Blue-Yellow Light, Sunlight; & Protocol 1 For Better Biology & Psychology;  
00:35:00 Protocol 2: Prevent & Offset Near-Sightedness (Myopia): Outdoors 2 Hours Per Day 
00:42:00 Improving Focus: Visual & Mental; Accommodation, Your Pupils & Your Bendy Lens 
00:48:50 Protocol 3: Distance Viewing For 20min For Every 90 Minutes of “Close Viewing” 
00:52:20 Protocol 4: Self-Generated Optic Flow; Move Yourself Through Space Daily 
00:54:26 Protocol 5: Be More Alert; Eyelids, Eye Size, Chin Position, Looking Up Versus Down 
00:59:21 Protocol 6: Sleep In A Very Dark Room To Prevent Myopia (Nearsightedness) 
01:02:55 Color Vision, Colorblindness, Use Magentas Not Reds,  
01:04:32 Protocol 7: Keeping Your Vision Sharp With Distance Viewing Every Day 
01:06:05 Protocol 8: Smooth Pursuit 
01:08:48 Protocol 9: Near-Far Visual Training 2-3 Minutes 3-4 Times a Week 
01:13:33 Protocol 10: Red Light, Emerging Protocol To Improve Photoreceptors & Vision 
01:16:20 Dry Eyes; Blinking, Protocol 11  
01:18:40 Lazy Eye, Binocular Vision, Amblyopia; Triggering Rapid Brain Plasticity; Protocol 12 
01:24:48 Protocol 12: Determine Your Dominant Eye; Near-Far Training  
01:27:57 Visual Hallucinations: The Consequence of An Under-Active Visual Brain
01:29:47 Protocol 13: Snellen Chart: A Simple, Cost-Free Way To Test & Maintain Vision  
01:33:00 Vitamin A, Lutein, Idebenone, Zeaxanthine, Astaxanthin, Blood Flow 
01:44:20 Summary of Protocols, Vital Point About Blood & Oxygen For Vision
01:46:00 Episode Length, Captions, Zero-Cost Support, Instagram, Searching Topics

#HubermanLab #EyeSight #Vision

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [gentle music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Roka. Founded by two All-American swimmers from Stanford, Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses have really been designed with the utmost care and the utmost attention to the science of optics and the visual system. So one of the things I like so much about Roka eyeglasses and sunglasses is that they're extremely lightweight. If you get sweaty, so for instance, if you wear them while running, or walking, or hiking, they don't slip off. And with the sunglasses, when you're outdoors, if there's cloud cover, or if there's shadows, or if the day gets brighter or dimmer, you can still see your surroundings perfectly well. And that's because the designers at Roka really understand the way the visual system works how it habituates, how it adapts. You don't need to understand the science behind all that, but they do, and as a consequence the eyeglasses perform extremely well under all conditions, whether or not that's indoors or outdoors. So they put a ton of science and purpose into the design. They also happen to look really good. They have a really nice aesthetic. A lot of, as you know, performance active wear eyeglasses look rather ridiculous, but the Roka glasses, I think, have a very nice aesthetic to them that you can wear anywhere. If you'd like to check out Roka glasses, you can go to Roka, that's roka.com and enter the code Huberman at checkout, and you'll get 20% off your first order. That's Roka, R-O-K-A .com and enter the code Huberman at checkout for 20% off your order. Today's podcast is also brought to us by Inside Tracker. Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and reach your health goals. I'm a big believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact our immediate and longterm health can only be analyzed from a blood test. And now, with the advent of modern DNA tests, we can also get insight into our specific DNA makeup and how that influences our lifestyle choices and our health status. The problem with a lot of blood tests is that you get a lot of information back, but you don't always know what to do with that information. With Inside Tracker, they have a very easy to use, personalized dashboard platform that informs you what sorts of lifestyle, nutrition, exercise, changes you might want to make, according to the levels of particular metabolic factors, hormone factors, et cetera, in your blood and DNA. So it makes everything very simple, both in terms of where you're at health-wise and what you should or could do, in order to improve your health, something I do believe most everybody would like to do. With Inside Tracker, it makes all that very easy. They also have something called the inner age test. This is a test that shows you what your biological age and compares to that, of course, to your chronological age. And, of course, your biological age is really what you want to know, because it's a predictor of how long you're going to live and the quality of your life. If you'd like to try Inside Tracker, you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman. And if you do that, you'll get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's plans, just use the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are ideally suited to your sleep needs. Everybody needs something different in terms of what to sleep on. Some people like a hard mattress. Some people like a soft mattress. Some people tend to run warm. Some people tend to run cold. With Helix Sleep, you go to their website, you take a very brief two-minute quiz, and you answer some questions such as, do you tend to sleep on your stomach, or your side, or your back? Maybe you don't know. Do you tend to run hot or cold, et cetera. At the end of that quiz, you match to a specific mattress. I took that quiz about six months ago, and I matched to the Dusk Mattress, and I've been sleeping on a Dusk mattress from Helix for the last six months, and I've been sleeping better than I ever have before. Basically, everyone's unique, and Helix understands that, and that's built into the design of their mattresses and this two-minute quiz that you take to match you to one. If you'd like to try a Helix Sleep mattress, you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman, take their two-minute quiz, and they'll match you to a customized mattress. You'll also get up to $200 off any mattress order and two free pillows. They make terrific pillows. You'll get a 10-year warranty on that mattress, and you get to try it out for 100 nights risk-free. If you don't like it, they'll come pick it up and take it away. You won't get charged, you'll get your money back, et cetera. So that's helixsleep.com/huberman for up to $200 off and two free pillows. We are now beginning a new topic for the next four to five episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast. Before we move into that, I want to just briefly touch on a couple questions that I got from the last episode, which was related to the science of endurance training. I described the four kinds of endurance training. We posted protocols of the specific four kinds of endurance training at hubermanlab.com. Just go to that episode, you can see the download, it's a zero-cost PDF. I got a lot of questions about what's called concurrent training, which is how to program endurance training if you are also interested in strength and hypertrophy training. Or how to incorporate strength and hypertrophy training, which was in the previous episode, with endurance training. This can all be made very simple. Ask yourself, what are you trying to emphasize, and then emphasize that for a 10 to 12 week cycle. So if you're mostly interested in endurance, I would say use a three to two ratio, maybe get three endurance training workouts per week, maybe four, and two strength and hypertrophy workouts. If you're mainly focusing on strength and hypertrophy, get three or four workouts for strength and hypertrophy and do two endurance workouts. Start with the minimum number of sets that's required to get the result that you want. So if you're not accustomed to doing endurance work, you would start with the minimum number that's listed on that protocol. So if it says three to five sets, you would start with three, maybe even just two, and then work your way up by adding sets each week. I do suggest that people get at least one complete rest day per week. And although I know a lot of people don't like that, I benefit from that. I actually benefit from having two complete rest days each week. I just continue to make progress that way, whether or not it's for strength and hypertrophy or for endurance. I am a big believer in rest days, other people are not. And those could be active rest days, hiking, relaxing, et cetera. After a 10 to 12 week cycle, then I also suggest taking anywhere from five to seven days completely off. You can still enjoy life and do things, I know for you addicted exercisers that you're going to loathe to do that, but that's one way to stay injury free, keep your joints and tissues healthy over time, and continue to make progress. If you don't want to do that week off, don't do it. None of this is holy. None of it is a strict prescriptive. Just ask yourself, what are you going to emphasize and emphasize that, in terms of the total volume of workouts that you do, and work up incrementally, and then move into another cycle. That's what I suggest. So go to hubermanlab.com, you can get the protocol there. We are now going to move into a new topic unrelated to physical performance. Starting with this episode and for the next four to five episodes, we are going to talk all about the senses. That's sight, eyesight, hearing, touch, taste, smell, and we're also going to talk about this critical sense that we call interoception, or our sense of our internal real estate. Now, the reason that we are talking about the senses is because if you understand how the senses are perceived, what they're about, what the underlying cells and connections are about, you will be in a terrific position to understand the month's topic that follows, which is all about mental health. Now, I want to emphasize that if you're somebody who doesn't have any trouble seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling and has an excellent sense of interoception, I do believe that these episodes will still be very relevant to you, because they have everything to do with how you move through the world, how you make sense of information, and how you organize your thoughts and your emotions. I also want to emphasize that we're going to cover a lot of practical tools. So today's episode is going to be all about vision and eyesight, a topic that's very near and dear to my heart, because it's the one that I've been focusing on for well over 25 years of my career. But we're not just going to get into the mechanistic details about how light is converted into electrical potentials and things like that. We are going to talk about practical tools that you can and should use to help maintain the health of your visual system and your eyesight. Very often, young people will say, what should I do? You know, you're always talking about, you know, neuroplasticity and how it tapers off over time, but I'm a young person, what should I do? You should absolutely train and support your eyesight. In fact, if you're a young person and you see perfectly, or you feel as if you see the world perfectly, you are in the best position to bolster, to reinforce that visual system, so that you don't lose your vision as you age. In addition, you can leverage your visual system for better mental and physical performance, and we're going to talk about that. If you're somebody who suffers from a clinical disorder of vision, you have trouble seeing, or if you need corrective lenses in order to see, this episode is definitely for you. And while of course I can't make clinical diagnoses, I can't have a one-to-one conversation with any of you in this format, nor am I a clinician, I'm a scientist, not a physician. I did consult with our chair of ophthalmology, Dr. Jeffrey Goldberg at Stanford University School of Medicine, as well as several other people to really vet the information and make sure that the protocols that I'm describing are consistent with the clinical literature. If you have a severe eye problem, you should be working with a really good ophthalmologist and/or optometrist, but certainly an an ophthalmologist who's a medical doctor. But I do believe that the information that we're going to discuss today is going to be relevant to everybody and will set the stage for the month on mental health and mental performance. So, let's get started. When we hear the word vision, we most often think about eyesight, or our ability to perceive shapes, and objects, and faces, and colors. And indeed, vision involves eyesight, our ability to see shapes, and objects, and faces, and colors, and so forth. However, our eyes are responsible for much more than that, including our mood, our level of alertness, and all of that is included in what we call vision. So I just want to take about three, maybe four minutes, and talk about how the visual system works, how it's built, and how you are able to so-called see things around you. I also want to describe the ways in which your eyes and your visual system impact your mood and your level of alertness. And then, we are going to get right into some protocols, some specific things that each and all of you should do if you want to enhance your vision and maintain your vision as you get older. And again, if you're a 15-year-old or a 12-year-old, this episode is especially for you, because your nervous system is far more plastic than mine is. It's much more amenable to change, so you can really build a very strong visual system. And in doing that, and if you adopt specific behaviors at any age of light viewing at particular times and particular ways, then you can build an emotional system that's also reinforced by your visual system. So, let's talk about vision. What is vision? Well, vision starts with the eyes. We have no what's called extraocular light perception. While it feels good to have light on our skin, while it feels good to be outside in the sunlight for most people, the only way that light information can get to the cells of your body is through these two little goodies on the front of your face. And for those of you listening, I'm just pointing to my eyes. As many of you have heard me say before, on this and other podcasts, your eyes, in particular, your neural retinas are part of your central nervous system. They are part of your brain. They're the only part of your brain that sits outside the cranial vault. In other words, you have two pieces of your brain that deliberately got squeezed out of the skull during development and placed in these things we call eye sockets. There's a genetic program for the specific purpose of making sure that three little layers of neurons, nerve cells, got squeezed out and form what are called your neural retinas. Now, the eyes have a lot of other goodies in them that are very important, and those are the goodies that we're going to focus on a lot today. There's a lens to focus light, precisely to the retina. If you're somebody who requires eyeglasses or contacts, chances are, you don't do that correctly, and so, that's why you use other lenses, like eyeglasses or contacts. There are also other pieces of the eye that are designed to keep the eye lubricated. You also have these things that we call eyelashes. Most people don't know this, but eyelashes are there to trigger the blink reflex if a piece of dust or something gets in front of your eye. It's a beautiful adaptation of nature. They aren't just aesthetically nice. Costello happens to have very long eyelashes. He gets compliments about this all the time. Maybe you have long eyelashes. I don't have particularly long eyelashes. But the eyelashes are there, so that if a piece of dust or something starts to head towards the cornea, the eye blinks very, very fast. It's the fastest reflex you own is your eye blink reflex. We also have these things called eyelids. Now, eyelids might seem like the most boring topic of all, but they are incredibly fascinating. Today, we're going to talk about how you can actually use your visual system to increase your levels of alertness based on the neural circuits that link your brainstem with your eyelids. And no, we are not going to have a blinking contest, because I would win and you would lose, and that wouldn't be fun for you. So, let's talk about what the eyes do for vision. Basically, the entire job of the eyes is to collect light information and send it off to the rest of the brain, in a form that the brain can understand. Remember, no light actually gets in past those neural retinas. It gets to the neural retina, and we have specific cells in the eye called photoreceptors. They come in two different types, rods and cones. Cones are mainly responsible for daytime vision, and the rods are mainly responsible for vision at night or under low light conditions, generally speaking. So basically what happens is if your eyelids are open, light comes into the eye, the lens focuses that light, light is also just called photons, light energy, onto the retina. These photoreceptors, the rods and cones, have chemical reactions inside them that involve things like vitamin A and that chemical reaction converts the light into electricity. Now, that might seem incredibly abstract, but the way to think about this is very similar to, for instance, you have touch receptors on your skin and when you press on those touch receptors, they convert pressure, physical pressure, into electrical information and those neurons send it up to your spinal cord and brain, and you can register that somebody or you are touching the top of your hand, as I'm doing now. With the eyes and the retina, it's just that light gets converted into electrical information. Within the eye, within the retina, there are then a series of stages of processing, and that information eventually gets sent into the brain by a very specific class of neurons. I would like you to know the names of these neurons. They're called retinal ganglion cells. So the only thing you need to know about the neuroscience of the eye at this point are that there are rods and cones. The cones are involved in bright daytime vision and rods are involved in more dusk or nighttime vision. And you've got these cells called retinal ganglion cells that send the information off to the rest of the brain. Now, here's what's incredible. I just want you to ponder this for a second. This still blows my mind. Everything you see around you, you're not actually seeing those objects directly. What you're doing is you're making a best guess about what's there based on the pattern of electricity that arrives in your brain. Now, that might just seem totally wild and hard to wrap your head around, but think about it this way, because this is the way it actually works. Let's take an example of a color, like green or blue. You have cones in your eye that respond best to the wavelength of light that is reflected off, say, a green apple. So, you don't actually see the green apple. What you see is the light bouncing off that green apple, and it goes into your eye, and you see it and perceive it as round and green, but not because you see anything green. No green light arrives in your brain. What happens is your brain actually compares the amount of green reflection coming off that apple to the amount of red and blue around it. Well, you might say, well, the green apple is sitting on a brown table or a white surface. Well, then, it will appear very green. Because the amount of wavelength of light for green is very high, and the amount for red is very low, and so, it looks very green, okay? So, we don't actually see anything directly. What the brain is receiving is a series of signals, electrical signals, and it's comparing electrical signals, in order to come up with what we call these perceptions. Like I see something green, a green apple, or I see red. Let me give you a slightly different example. If you were to play a key on the piano, let's say you play, I'm not a musician, but I'm going to, so hopefully I won't get this too incorrectly but let's say you have like E sharp, and maybe it's like ding, ding, ding, ding, ding. If the brain gets that signal, it doesn't actually know E that's what, it doesn't recognize it until you were to play another key next to it, dun, dun, dun, dun, and what it does, it does the math, it does the subtraction, and it compares those two. So when we see something green, or we see something red, or we see something blue, we're not actually seeing it directly. The brain is making a guess about how green or red or blue that thing is by comparing what's around it, okay? And if that seems hard to wrap your head around, don't worry, because we will explain it in more depth going forward. But I really want people to understand this, that vision, eyesight, is not looking at things directly, and that information getting directly into your brain, it is translated. Light information is transformed into electrical signals that your visual system exquisitely understands. Now, what does this mean? Why should you care about this? Well, if you have a dog like I do, or a cat, they are not colorblind, but they lack the cones that respond to red, meaning long wavelength light. So what does that mean? That means that when they see green, it's different than the green you see. Not because that apple is invisible to them, but because they aren't able to compare it to red, and you are. As a consequence, when they look at a green lawn, it looks more brownish or orange to them. When you wear a red shirt in front of your dog or cat, if you see a stop sign and they see a stop sign, they see orangish-brown, and you see red. presuming that you are a trichromat, meaning you have three-color vision. So, this is all to say that every animal sees the world differently, depending on whether or not they have one or two or three of these different cones, the red, blue, or green cones. If you are a mantis shrimp of all things, you see hundreds of colors that human beings can't see, okay? Many things animals see into visual ranges that you and I can't see in. So for instance, a pit viper senses heat emissions, it literally sees the heat coming off of you or of an animal that they want to eat. If you are a ground squirrel, you can see ultraviolet light. This is going to sound kind of weird, but ground squirrels actually signal one another by standing up outside and shining sunlight off each other's stomachs to each other, signaling at a distance, just like, you know, you could signal somebody with a mirror in sunlight at distance. There are species of primates, this isn't very pleasant to think about, that urinate on their hands, and then wipe it all over their stomach. and then use that sunlight to reflect different signals to each other. I don't know what they're saying. We always assume it's something cute and nice, but maybe they're insulting each other. So this actually gets right down to the heart of these bigger questions, like consciousness, what do we see? What's out there? How much of life is really accessible to us? And I could go on and on, you know, this used to be kind of an obsession of mine when I was coming up in the field of visual neuroscience to understand how different animals see the world compared to us. You know, I'll give one more example, a diving bird, you know, a bird that flies over the ocean. It has an incredible task. It has to both view the horizon, and it has to view schools of fish, and then, it has to make a trajectory down into the water and grab one of those fish to eat. And the water has what's called a refractory index. It actually shifts like a prism, the impression or the perception of where that fish is, right? If the bird sees the fish right below it, it has to know, it has to adjust its diving trajectory just right, because it knows that that fish actually isn't where it sees it. It's probably a few inches ahead or to the side of that, because of the way that water diverts the image. If you've ever dropped a coin to the bottom of a pool, if you go straight down looking at that location. If you were to look from the top of the pool, and you dive straight down with your eyes closed, you will miss, because the water refracts, it shifts the visual image. Well, diving birds have an arrangement of these retinal cells that communicate to the brain that's both a streak to view the horizon, 'cause they need to know where they are relative to the horizon, and they have a pupil like we do on the bottom of their eye, so that they can make very accurate dive and attacks on these schools of fish, and catch fish, and eat those fish. We just have pupils in the middle of our eyes. So there's a ton about the optics of the eye, and the way that it communicates with the brain that allows us to see. We could spend hours talking about this, but what I'd like to embed in your mind is that what you experience in the outside world is bottlenecked, it's limited by which wavelengths, which colors if you will, of light that you can see. That your brain is coming up with a best guess about what's there. It doesn't actually know what's there. And that your vision is distinctly different from say, the vision of a dog or from the vision of somebody who's a dichromat, meaning they don't have a red cone. A lot of people, in particular about 1 in 80 males, lacks a red cone and therefore, sees the world much the same way that Costello does. Although, he sees it from just much lower toward the ground. So, that's what I'd like you to understand about the way the eye communicates with the brain. I would also like you to understand that the brain itself is making these guesses and that those guesses are largely right. How do I know that? Well, they're right because when you reach out to grab a glass, most of the time you grab the glass, and you don't miss, right? Most of the time, when you make judgments about the world around you, based on your visual impression of them, it allows you to move functionally through the world. But let me give you some examples of where this guessing is happening right now. And it's so incredible that, to this day, this still blows my mind. Cover one eye with one hand. If you're driving, maybe don't do this. If you're viewing the world around you, presumably you can see everything that's out there. I could do this with one eye or the other eye. You probably see better out of one or the other, and we'll talk about that. You have a giant blind spot in the middle of your visual field. It's called your blind spot. It is the spot in which the connections, the wires, from all those retinal ganglion cells exit the back of the eye and head off toward the brain. In other words, you are blind for a huge spot of your central vision. The part of your vision that's highest acuity, highest detail, and yet, you don't see that ever. You cover one eye, and you see perfectly fine. And it's not just because your eye is moving around really quickly. Your brain is guessing what's in that spot, which is absolutely incredible, and so, you don't see that blind spot. This is happening all the time. Now, when you have two eyes open, the way that your eyes are positioned in your head and the way they view the world is such that they fill in each other's blind spots, so it's pretty convenient. But if you cover one eye, that's impossible, and yet, you still see the world as complete. So the brain is doing these incredible things. It's also creating depth, a sense of depth. Even though what arrives from the retina is essentially a readout of a two-dimensional, flat image, so it can sense depth. How do you know depth? Well, this is very simple. Things that are closer to you tend to be larger than things that are far away. Things that are closer to you tend to look like they're moving faster. If you've ever been in a train and you look to your side, the rungs on a fence, or the train tracks going by you, look like they're going very fast. If you look off in the distance, they look like they're moving very slowly. And there are differences between what's close to you and what's further away. So, a little house on the horizon, you don't look at it and say, oh, that must be a tiny, little house. You have some prior knowledge that things further away are smaller. So that's the main way that you do that. And you compare the location, at which information about light lands on the two eyes. So your eyes are slightly offset from one another. So that, for instance, if I look at you, if you were standing right in front of me right now, and I were to look at you, the image of your face, the light bouncing off your face to be more precise, lands on one eye in a slightly different location than it does in the other eye, and then the brain does math. It basically does the equivalent of geometry and trigonometry, and essentially figures out how far away you are from me, which is just incredible. So the brain does all this very, very fast, and the brain uses about 40 to 50% of its total real estate for vision. That's how important vision is. Now, for those of you that are blind, or low vision, or no vision, that real estate in the brain will be taken over by neurons that control sense of touch and a sense of hearing, and your, indeed, hearing and touch are much better, higher acuity, and faster in blind people. But for most of you, who I presume are sighted, this is how it works. So, that's kind of vision from eye to brain in a nutshell. There are a bunch of different stations in the brain that do different things. That's eyesight. Now, I want to talk about the other aspect of vision, which is the stuff that you don't perceive, the subconscious stuff. And then, we'll transition directly into how you can use light and eyesight to control this other stuff because it's very important and that other stuff is mood, sleep, and appetite. And there are ways in which you can use the same protocols that I will describe, in order to preserve and even enhance your vision, your ability to see things and consciously perceive them. So the protocols we will describe have a lot of carry over to both conscious eyesight and to these subconscious aspects of vision. And I just want you to understand a little bit more about the science of seeing, of eyesight and vision, and then all the protocols will make perfect sense. So as amazing as eyesight is, it actually did not evolve for us to see shapes and colors and motion and form. The most ancient cells in our eyes, and the reason we have eyes, is to communicate information about time of day to the rest of the brain and body. Remember, there's no extraocular photo reception. There's no way for light information to get to all the cells of your body, but every cell in your body needs to know if it's night or day. And I talked a little bit about this on the, in the episodes on sleep, and this episode is not about sleep. But I want to emphasize that there is a particular category of retinal ganglion cell, remember the neurons that connect the retina to the brain, that is involved in a special kind of vision that has nothing to do with conscious perception of what's around you, and it's happening right now, it's happening all the time. These are so-called melanopsin retinal ganglion cells, named after the opsin that they contain within them. They are essentially photoreceptors, remember before I said there are photoreceptors and then these ganglion cells? Well, these melanopsin cells, as the name suggests, melanopsin, have their own photoreceptor built inside them. The opsin that they contain is actually very similar to the melanopsin that is present in the skin of some amphibians and that causes those amphibians to change their skin color in different light conditions. So you have, believe it or not, a little bit of frog skin in your eye, so to speak. Okay, not exactly, but you essentially have the equivalent of what frogs have on their skin in your eye. If you are low vision or no vision, as long as you have retinas, it's very likely you still have these cells, even though you can't see or you don't see well. These cells, retinal ganglion cells, communicate to areas of the brain when particular qualities of light are present in your environment and signal to the brain, therefore, that it's early day or late in the day. These melanopsin ganglion cells are sometimes also called intrinsically photosensitive cells because they behave like photoreceptors. What do these cells respond to, and why should you care about them? Well, you should care about them, because they regulate when you'll get sleepy, when you'll feel awake, how fast your metabolism is, excuse me, your blood sugar levels, your dopamine levels, and your pain threshold. There are other factors that impact those things, but they are one of the, if not the most powerful determinant, of those other things like mood and pain threshold, sleepiness, wakefulness, et cetera. These melanopsin ganglion cells have been shown by the Nitz Group, N-I-T-Z, up at University of Washington, and by Samer Hattar's lab and David Burson's lab, and a number of other people's labs, Satchin Panda, Prevencio, et cetera, a number of excellent labs in neuroscience to set the circadian clock and to respond best to the contrast between blue and yellow light of the sort that lands on the cells when you view the sun, when it's a so-called low solar angle, when it's low in the sky, either in the morning or in the evening, what does all this mean? It means, and here's the first protocol, and you've probably heard me say this before, but is appropriate to this episode to say it again. If you are not viewing the sun, sunlight, even through cloud cover, for two to 10 minutes in the early part of the day, when the sun is still low in the sky and doing the same thing again in the evening, you are severely disrupting your sleep rhythms, your mood, your hormones, your metabolism, your pain threshold, and many other factors, including your ability to learn and remember information. The most central and important aspect of our biology, and perhaps our psychology as well, is to anchor ourselves in time, to know when we exist. Okay, it sounds a little bit abstract and philosophical, but it's not. And we don't know time as a real thing because of watches and clocks. We know time at a biological level, based on where the sun is and where, which of course is where we are relative to the sun, because the earth is spinning around. Now, what does this mean for a protocol? It means, see, get that light in your eyes early in the day, and anytime you want to be awake. So try and get as much sunlight in your eyes during the day as you safely can. We'll talk about eye safety this episode in depth. And the blue light and the contrast of that blue yellow, remember we don't see blue, this is all subconscious. This is blue reflections coming off of sunlight. Blue light, we've been told is so terrible for us, it is absolutely essential and wonderful for waking up the brain, for triggering all sorts of positive biological reactions, but it needs to be viewed early in the day. If you can't see sunlight, because it's the thick cloud cover of say a, you know, you're in the UK and it's winter, then artificial lights, especially blue lights, would be very beneficial to you. We need a lot of this light and its contrast with yellow, in order to trigger these melanopsin cells, which will then trigger your circadian clock, which sits above the roof of your mouth, which will signal every cell in your body, including temperature, rhythms, et cetera. So first things first, your visual system was not for seeing faces, motion, et cetera. The most ancient cells in your eye, which are there right now as we speak, are there to inform your body and brain about time of day, so you want to get that bright light early in the day. Absolutely essential, two to 10 minutes, you can download the light meter app if you want to measure lux. When we, when I explained how to do that in earlier episodes it got a little convoluted, get that two to 10 minutes, ideally without sunglasses. Now, here's another reason to do this, and I've never spoken about this before on any podcast, which is that there have been several studies now in thousands of subjects, exploring what can be done to prevent myopia, nearsightedness, and other visual defects. And it turns out, in a series of large clinical trials, the conclusion has emerged that getting two hours a day of outdoor time without sunglasses, blue light, this blue light that everyone has demonized, getting that sunlight during the day for two hours, even if you're reading other things, and doing other things outside, has a significant effect on reducing the probability that you will get myopia, nearsightedness. Now, whether or not that's also due to the fact that myopia can be caused by viewing things up close to too much. So if you're indoors, we tend to be looking at things more closely, right? Unless you have a very large house with walls that are very far away from you, but the effect does seem to be directly related to getting sunlight, and not just to the distance that you're viewing. I'm going to describe this study just briefly, but this is a second protocol. So we have one protocol about getting sunlight to set your circadian clocks, meaning wake you up, establish your sleep, will occur about 12 to 16 hours later, that's all in the sleep episode. But also to enhance your mood, to enhance your metabolism, to optimize your hormone levels, and to optimize learning and dopamine levels, this feel good neuromodulator that's essential to not getting depressed, et cetera. But now's the second protocol, which is ideally, and this includes children, as long as they're not very small infants, ideally, we're all getting two hours of outdoor time, even if there's cloud cover. Remember, we evolved mostly under outdoor conditions, not indoor conditions, and no artificial blue light will not replace this aspect of your visual system and offsetting myopia. So I just want to briefly describe this study, because it's a very important one, and I don't think it's discussed often enough. There are many studies exploring this, but one of the ones I liked the most, looked at 693 students, and a subset of them were encouraged to spend 11 hours a week outdoors. Okay, so most kids are in school five days a week or so, so they're spending 11 hours a week outdoors. They are sometimes reading outdoors. They're not always just playing outdoors, they might be reading books, et cetera. They used eight different schools. And the reason they did the study, I probably should have mentioned, is that myopia, nearsightedness, is a global epidemic. At least, that's how it was referred to in the study. I don't know who decides what's an epidemic or not. I think there are thresholds for that. This paper published in the journal Ophthalmology in 2018 described the fact that being outdoors for two hours a day could significantly reduce the probability that these children would develop nearsightedness. And it turns out based on other studies, that adults who spend two hours a day outside, that would be reading outside, talking outside. No, it does not include light coming through the windshield of your car, I'll explain why in a few moments, offset the formation of myopia. Now, myopia, or nearsightedness, has to do with the way that the lens focuses light onto the retina. I don't want to get into a long description of this now, but basically the lens has bring light to the retina, not in front of it, not behind it. If it brings light to a position in front of the retina, then you won't see clearly, you will need corrective lenses. If it brings light directly to the retina, then you will see clearly, that should be intuitive why that makes, why it makes sense. So you might say, well, why would being outside, getting this blue light or this blue-yellow contrast from sunlight actually offset myopia? Well, it probably, and I want to emphasize probably has to do with the fact that these melanopsin ganglion cells, these intrinsically photosensitive ganglion cells, are not just responsible for sleep, and talking to your circadian clock, and that sort of thing, they also make connections within the retina. They connect to things like, this is for the aficionados, the ciliary body, the iris, the muscles and the structures within the eye that actually move the lens and allow you to adjust your vision to things up close or far away. And in doing so, they increase or improve the health of the little tiny muscles within the eye that move the lens. And they probably, again, this needs a little bit more work, in order to really tamp down the mechanism. They're probably also involved in bringing growth factors and blood supply to the muscles and to the neurons that are responsible for this focusing mechanism within the eye. So remember, your eye is an optical device. You were born with lenses, you don't have to use glasses, or maybe you do because you have lenses in your eyes and those lenses need to move. It's not a rigid lens, like a glass lens. It's a dynamic lens, and it has little muscles that pull on it, and squeeze it, and make it thicker or thinner, as you look at things close and far away, and I'll describe how that works in a moment. These melanopsin cells and their activation by sunlight, completely subconsciously, unaware, you're unaware of this, promote the health of this system within the eye and allow you to offset the myopia, nearsightedness. In other words, getting outside for two hours a day, each day, on average, even if there's cloud cover, without sunglasses on, will allow you to offset the formation of myopia. Now, you might still form myopia if you have certain structural features or a genetic basis for that, we will talk about things that you can do as well. But for everybody, we should be doing this. And that might seem like a lot, but this is the way that your visual system works. Staying indoors, just getting artificial light, and looking at things up close leads to visual defects. Okay, it's a form of kind of like visual obesity, right? The posture of your visual system, if you will, is going to be unhealthy if you're just indoors and you're not getting sunlight early in the day and for at least two hours per day. I want to talk a little bit more about how our eyes adjust to things that are close to us or far away. This is an absolutely brilliant consequence of our nature and our design. And whenever I say nature and design, people always ask me, you know, what are you really trying to say? Are you trying to talk about creators? Are you talking about intelligent design? Look, I want to be very frank with you. I wasn't consulted at the design phase, and neither were you. And so, that is all very interesting, but it's not the topic of this discussion. What is clear and what is the topic of this discussion is that the eye can dynamically adjust where light lands by moving the lens and changing the shape of the lens in your eye, through a process called accommodation. And if you understand this process of accommodation, you not only can enhance the health of your eyes in the immediate and long-term, but you also can work better. You'll be able to focus better on physical and mental work. You will be able to concentrate for longer. And I want to emphasize that so much of our mental focus, whether or not it's for cognitive endeavors or physical endeavors, is grounded in where we place our visual focus, okay? What we look at and our ability to hold our concentration there is critically determining how we think. So, in other words, if you can hold visual focus, you can hold mental focus, cognitive focus, but holding visual focus is challenging, it's tiring, because it requires movement of the lens. And that movement of the lens requires activation of muscles. And the activation of muscles, as you know from the physical performance episodes, if you saw them and even if you don't, is dictated by neurons. So, what is accommodation? Well, it's actually very simple and very elegant. And again, this is another case where whenever I look at this stuff, even though I've been looking at for years, learning about it for years, it still boggles my mind that we have these apparati built into our eyes. So, we have lenses in our eyes, and we have these things called the irises. You know, you're all familiar with the iris, because you'll see people's pupils get bigger or smaller, and we intuitively think of eyes as having the pupils. If you actually draw two circles on a sheet of paper, and you just, they look like two circles. But if you put little dots in the middle of them, they look like eyes. Your brain recognizes those as eyes, because one of the first things you see when you come into this world are eyes. And actually, if you put the little dots close together, it'll look kind of wrong, like it's cross-eyed. And if you put them at different locations within those two dots, of opposing locations, it'll look google-eyed. And so, your brain is actually filling in all the face and other information, even emotional information, just based on this recognition of eyes. And so, there's clearly we know this, there's real estate deep up in, you know, further up in the brain, that's responsible for analyzing and recognizing faces and the eyes and the position of these little things we call irises, and pupils, et cetera, is really important for how we interpret the status of others. And that's why it's such a powerful thing just to put two circles and, you know, move the pupils around on paper. In fact, I want to get into accommodation, but if you think about it, if one of my pupils was up there and the other one was down there, one was really big, and one was really small, that would actually be a sign of pretty severe damage. If someone gets hit hard on the side of the head, you'll notice that they shine a light in one eye. You know why they're doing that? They're actually looking at the other eye. When you shine light of the eye that pupil constricts to limit the amount of light that comes in, so it doesn't damage the eye. This also happens when you walk outside, and it's bright, it constricts, but we have what's called the consensual pupil reflex. There's a connection deep in the brainstem, deep back here in the brain near my neck, that connects the pupil mechanism for the two eyes, and they're looking at the other eye. And if you shine light in one eye, and that people constricts but the other one doesn't, there's a good chance there's brainstem damage. This is what they do on the side of a, you know, football field or a boxing match, or if someone unfortunately hits their head. So, two pupils and don't freak out if one pupil is a little bit smaller than the other, that doesn't necessarily mean brain damage. But if you suddenly have one pupil bigger than the other, you absolutely want to go see a neurologist right away. So, the eyes and the pupils are indicative of things that are happening deep in the brain. Now, accommodation is our ability to accommodate to things that are up close here or further away. And the way this works is that the iris, and the musculature, and a structure called the ciliary body move the lens. So, when you look far away, okay, when you see things far away, your lens actually relaxes, it can flatten out. So I want you to think about this. When you look far away, when it may be anywhere from like 20 feet away from you out to a horizon that's miles or kilometers away from you, the lens can just relax. It can flatten out. And you'll notice that it actually is relaxing to look at a horizon. It's relaxing to look far away. Whereas if I look at something up close to me like this pen, or my phone, or a computer screen, or this microphone, it takes effort. You'll sense the effort. Now, some of that effort is actually eye movements, because you have muscles that can move your eyes within their sockets. But a lot of the work, quote unquote, is neural work of the muscles having to move and contract, such that the lens actually gets thicker, in order to bring the light to the retina and not to a location in front of it or behind it, so called accommodation. There's also changes in the size of the pupil, as things are closer and further away from you. In fact, there's a simple way to think about this. Healthy pupils are going to dilate when you look at something far away from you. Now, when you see something that excites you or stresses you out, your pupils also get big. Your eyes get wide. But if you look at something far away, your pupils are going to dilate. And when you look at things that are closer to you, when you move them up close, the pupils are going to shrink. That's all part of this accommodation mechanism. Now, you might say, why are you telling me about accommodation? This is crazy. Why are you telling me about this? Well, these days we're spending a lot of time looking at things, mainly our phones up close, and computers up close, and we are indoors. If you are a young person, and even if you are 25 or older, and you are spending a lot of time looking at things up close, and you are not allowing your vision to relax. In other words, you are not giving your lens the opportunity to flatten out, and for these muscles to relieve themselves of this work, you may or may not have migraine headaches. You may or may not have headaches. You might, and that could be the cause of those. But you are also training your eyes to be good at looking at things up close and not far away, and as a consequence, you are reshaping the neural circuitry in your brain, and it is not good. It is not healthy to only look at things up close. Now, there are a lot of recommendations out there right now, especially with all the lockdowns of the last, you know, 12 to 18 months that people should look up from Zoom every once in a while. Or maybe now, I'm hearing that people should take calls instead of doing Zoom, where you should look up from your computer screen. It's actually not going to solve the problem, just to look up from your computer screen. You need to go to a window. You need to look out at a distance. Ideally, you would even open the window, because those windows actually filter out a lot of the blue light that you want during the daytime. A lot of the sunlight, it's actually 50 times less gets through. You want to get out onto a balcony. You want to relax your eyes and look out at the horizon. You want to go into what's called panoramic vision, and let your vision expand. You want this lens mechanism to be very elastic. You don't want it to get stuck in that configuration of looking at things up close. Accommodation is a wonderful feature of your visual system, but you don't want to push that too hard, too often, or for too long. You want to view the horizon. You want to get outside, not just to lighten the load on your mind, or to think about other things, but to maintain the health of your visual system. In other words, you want to exercise these muscles and that involves both the lens moving and getting kind of thicker and relaxing that lens. And the relaxation of the lens is actually one of the best things you can do for the musculature of the inner eye. So what's the protocol, how often should you do this? You might be surprised, but for every 30 minutes of focused work, you probably want to look up every once in a while and just try and relax your face and eye muscles, including your jaw muscles, because all these things are closely linked in the brainstem and allow your eyes to go into a so-called panoramic vision, where you're just not really focusing on anything and then refocus on your work. At least every 90 minutes of looking at things up close, or even if you're looking at a screen, you know, television screen, or you're watching a movie, or you're indoors, for every 90 minutes of that, you ideally would have at least 20, probably more like 30 minutes of being outside, ideally. But if you can't be outside, of non up-close vision. And you might say, that's impossible, how am I supposed to do that? You know, I'm in an office or I'm in a building. Get to a window, get outside if you can do it safely, get onto a balcony, and just let your eyes relax. Many people are experiencing severe vision problems, because they're not getting enough sunlight during the day. They have sleep problems, because they're not viewing sunlight early in the day. And as I've mentioned in previous episodes, they're getting a lot of artificial stimulation, artificial light stimulation, of the eye in the middle of the night, all of this is through the visual system. So migraines, fatigue, challenges with your eyesight getting worse as you age, or even in young people, there's a, you know, at least according to the articles, they describe it as this epidemic of myopia can largely be dealt with by getting outside, going into panoramic vision, experiencing some distanced vision, look at things off in the horizon. If you're walking or hiking or biking, not looking at your phone the whole time that you're doing that. If you're at the bus stop or you're commuting, certainly not looking at your phone the entire time you're doing that. So this is vital. And I want to emphasize another protocol, though I don't want to get into it in too much depth, 'cause I want to make sure that I also talk about a number of other important aspects of the visual system that are more related to sight, but getting into optic flow is very important for de-stressing your system. When you move through space, whether or not it's through walking, biking, even swimming, if it's self-generated optic flow, so probably not driving or motorcycling, but yes, bicycling or I don't know, unicycling. I don't know why I thought about unicycling. There used to be a graduate student at Stanford who was a really impressive unicycler, those are pretty rare. As long as it's self-generated optic flow, meaning you're generating motion of your body and the visual images around you are passing by on your eyes, that is very good for the visual system. And it's very good for the mood systems and the neuromodulator systems of the brain and body that regulate mood. This is well-established. So I'm not telling people to get away from their phone and their computers. I spend a lot of time staring at a page, drawing, writing, texting, et cetera, just like you do, but we're really talking about some very simple protocols that aren't just designed to improve your sleep, but are really designed to bolster and enhance your vision. And of course, because it's this podcast, we will also talk about things that you can take to improve your vision. But if your visual behavior isn't right, and I do believe we should always start with behaviors, and then think about nutrition, supplementation, et cetera, if your behaviors around vision aren't right, you cannot expect to have good, healthy eyesight for a long time, meaning throughout your lifespan. And if your vision is already poor, many of these things that I'm talking about today, perhaps all of them, will improve your vision to some degree. And if your vision is starting to go, then doing these behaviors is likely to really enhance the quality of the vision that you will build and maintain over time. And all of these are essentially zero cost, okay? If you live in a very dark environment, like a cave or outer space, it's going to be hard to do some of this stuff. But if you're on planet earth, even if there's cloud cover, chances are you can do some, or most, or even all of these some, most, or all days. What I'm about to describe next is going to seem so silly on the face of it, but has deep mechanism to support it. Put simply, when you get tired, your eyelids close, and when you're alert, your eyelids are open. That is because you have neurons in your brain, that depending on your level of alertness, will make it easy or hard to keep your eyes open. Now, that's a complete duh, except that we don't often think about the relationship between alertness and where we are looking and our eyelids. Now, I learned this from a colleague of mine in psychiatry, who happens to work on hypnosis. I'm not going to hypnotize you right now. That's actually for a future episode. But what happens when we get tired? Our eyelids close, and our chin moves down. We tend to nod out this way. If you have ever been in a classroom, certainly not one of mine, but if you've been in a classroom and the lecturer is kind of drawing on, or it's the afternoon, what you'll notice is that a number of students, their heads are jolt, kind of their eyelids are closing, and their chin is dropping, and they, you'll see a bunch of heads bouncing back up, right? I was definitely one of those people in class. If it was post-lunch in the afternoon, it's warm, the hum of the air conditioner, or whatever it is, and I'm just out, okay? When we're wide awake, the opposite happens. Our eyelids are open all the way, and our chin happens to be up. And no, this is not me telling you to have good posture. However, what I learned from my colleague at Stanford is that these circuits actually act in loops. When we look up, maybe it's because these melanopsin cells are in the bottom of our retina, they are, and maybe it's because they're there in order to view sunlight, which is overhead, which it is, but that system of alertness is linked to the position of our eyes. So when we look up and our eyelids are up, it actually has a purpose. It actually creates a wakefulness signal for the brain. And so, while this might seem like the silliest and simple tool that I might ever describe on this podcast, if you are feeling tired, it actually can be beneficial to the wakefulness systems of the brain, including the locus coeruleus and these areas that release norepinephrine to actually look up, to actually look up toward the ceiling. You don't want your chin all the way back, but to look up and to raise your eyes toward the ceiling and to look up and try and hold that for 10 to 15 seconds. So this isn't looking up and closing your eyes, like on a nice sunny day, that's relaxing. This is looking up and actually looking up at the ceiling. It actually triggers some of the areas of the brain that are involved in wakefulness. So if you're somebody who's falling asleep at your work, this can be very beneficial. Likewise, many people are looking at their phone all day, and their chin is down, and then they're sitting at a computer that's positioned below them, and they're having trouble staying awake or focusing. It can be very, I tell Costello this all the time, 'cause he's always falling asleep while he's trying to do his work, positioning your computer screen up at eye level, or sometimes having it actually above eye level, can actually create wakefulness and alertness for the work that you're going to do. This is simply because of this connection between the brainstem circuits and the other neural circuits that control wakefulness and eyelids opening and looking up. Okay, so it, again, it's remarkably simple, almost laughably simple, but it's grounded in some of the most hardwired, meaning present from birth, aspects of our neural circuitry. And norepinephrine released from locus coeruleus isn't just a mouthful, it's a really interesting and powerful mechanism for how the rest of the brain wakes up. Locus coeruleus hoses the rest of your brain with norepinephrine, in order to wake up those circuits for work and attention. And so, eyes up is actually a way, a route into increased alertness. Eyes down is a route into sleepiness, into reduced alertness. And I have only one friend that texts up here, like on the street holds his phone up here. It looks ridiculous. And yet, you know, if we were trying to create more sense of alertness, if that's your goal, positioning computer screens up high, chin up, looking up if you need to kind of create an alertness signal, not always being chin down and texting, or working into typewriters, or reading below us. is actually going to send a recurring wakefulness signal. When things are up, we tend to be alert. When everything's focused down, including our eyes, it tends to have a more suppressive or sedative type signaling to the deeper centers of the brain. Now, before we move on to the science, and tools, and protocols related to pattern vision, I want to mention another study that was done by the University of Pennsylvania. They have a terrific group there that works on sleep. They made an important discovery that I think everybody should know about, which is that children that sleep in rooms that have a nightlight or dim lights are much more likely to develop myopia, nearsightedness. Conversely, children that sleep in very dark rooms, so either very dim nightlights or complete black, they have a much lower, statistically speaking, a significantly lower probability of developing myopia, nearsightedness. Now, why is that? It's because the wavelengths of light that matter for these melanopsin cells, oftentimes can get through the eyelids. And that's particularly true for children and people that have thin eyelids. Some people, like me, have very thin eyelids. I've been told this before. Not many people touch my eyelids, but among those that have, I have very thin eyelids. I notice I have very thin eyelids compared to say, Costello. Now, Costello's eyes droop. He can't even close his eyes all the way they're so droopy. But many people have thin eyelids, and those people are going to be even more prone to light coming in through the eyelid. So for parents, for kids, and for adults, you really want to try to get to a place where you can sleep in a completely black or dark environment. One little exposure to light, no big deal. But this ties back to the other protocol that I've described before in the mood and sleep episodes, which is that viewing light, even a very low intensity between the hours of 10:00 PM and 4:00 AM is extremely detrimental to the dopamine and other mood producing systems of the brain. It can negatively impact learning, and immunity, and even blood sugar, and make people type two diabetes prone by way of communication from these melanopsin cells to a structure in the brain called the habenula. Why am I throwing out all this verbiage? Well, because people have asked for more mechanisms. So, if you really want to know, when you look at blue light or if blue light is getting in through your eyelids in the middle of the night, it is likely distorting this lens accommodation mechanism in the eye and leading to myopia in some cases. So, that's one reason to avoid blue light exposure and bright light exposure, even nightlight exposure, in middle of the night. Viewing any light of bright intensity between the hours of 10:00 PM and 4:00 AM on a consistent basis is going to suppress dopamine, because of the way that that light activates these melanopsin cells, and the habenula, and the dopamine system. So it's all very simple, get as much bright light as you can safely, right? You never want to look at any light so bright that it's painful look at, during the daytime. Try and go without sunglasses, unless you need them. Now, I wear sunglasses for sake of sport and sake when it's really bright out, but I try to get two hours a day of working outside or being outside, even if there's cloud cover, that's going to offset myopia. It's going to help you get better sleep. It's going to support mood and metabolism, et cetera. And at night, if you're sleeping with a lot of lights in the room, and especially, if there are kids that need a nightlight, you should try and wean them off that nightlight, because it's going to be beneficial for their vision to wean them off that nightlight and put them into a darker environment. Obviously, you want to get them emotionally comfortable with that first. Now, let's talk about pattern vision, actual seeing things, like faces and colors, et cetera. I'm presuming that some of you out there are colorblind. We can all help the red-green colorblind folks out there by not using red in slides and diagrams, and on menus, and things of that sort. Try and use magenta instead. They can see the contrast between magenta and green better than if there's red and green. So, be kind to the colorblind folks out there. It's actually a fair percentage. And there are a lot of different kinds of colorblind. I should just mention some people are true monochromats. They see the world in black and white. That's exceedingly rare. Most colorblind people, colorblind in quotes, are red-green colorblind, meaning they lack red cone photo pigment, meaning they can't see long wavelengths of light. So they see the world much as a canine or a cat does, where they don't get the green-red contrast. That's why we call it red-green colorblind. They have the green cones, but they can't do the contrast comparison that I described at the beginning of the episode. So use magenta, and they will be able to see things. You wonder why stop signs and stop lights and things aren't in magenta. Well, because the world is unkind to the red-green color blind individuals, and they have to learn the position of those lights in the street lights. And they have to learn the shapes of signs, which they can do readily, and it usually says stop on it as well. But if you care about colorblind folks, which I do, then we could all do them a service by, I think by law actually in the U.S., menus are required to be colorblind accessible. How can you improve your vision? How can you get better at seeing things? Well, one way is to make sure that you spend at least 10 minutes a day total, at least, viewing things off in the distance. So that would be well over half a mile or more, try and see a horizon, try and get your vision out to a location that's beyond the four walls of your house or apartment, or the doors of your car, and the windshield of your car. I know that can be hard to do, but it's very valuable. If you live in a city like New York and it's skyscrapers everywhere, you've probably experienced the incredible sense of relaxation, and it's aesthetically beautiful, when you are walking down one of these long avenues, and you turn, and I think they have a name for this in New York, where the sunset is suddenly visible along a long avenue between some skyscrapers. And it's just very relaxing to be able, suddenly, to see at a distance, and that's actually because this eye mechanism of relaxing the lens and relaxing some of the musculature around the eyes sends signals deep into the brainstem that release some of the centers that are involved in alertness, AKA stress. And it's very pleasant for a reason. It's not a, it's not a placebo effect if you will. There are a bunch of neurochemicals and things that are associated with that. So try and see at a distance, because it's good for your eyesight. It'll keep this lens nice and elastic, and the muscles nice and strong that move the lens, and it has this relaxing component to it. Now, our visual system is exquisitely tuned to motion, not just our self-generated motion, but the motion of things around us. And one of the things that it does is something called smooth pursuit. Smooth pursuit is our ability to track individual objects moving, as the name suggests, smoothly through space in various trajectories. You can actually train or improve your vision by looking at smooth pursuit stimuli, and that sounds really boring. What you can do is, and I'll provide a link to some that I think are pretty good that are used in various clinics, ophthalmology and optometry clinics. You can actually take a few minutes each day, or maybe if you don't do it each day, you could every third day or so, and actually just visually track a ball. Sometimes it's moving in and kind of an infinity symbol. Sometimes it's more of a sawtooth. Sometimes it's changing speed. Sometimes the cue that you're following, the little target, is dilating and contracting. This is going to keep the muscles, I want to be clear, this is going to keep the extraocular muscles conditioned and strong and allow you to have a healthy smooth pursuit system. Remember, the brain follows the eye. It follows the movements of the eye. It has to deal with that. And the neural circuits within the brain have to cope with changes in smooth pursuit. So if you're doing a lot of reading up close, you're not viewing horizons, you're not getting a lot of smooth pursuit type stimulation from your life, or you're just getting it within the confines of a little box on your phone, like your smooth pursuit is over, you know, millimeters or what we always talk in terms of visual angle, but the amount of degrees of visual angle. But if you're just looking at smooth pursuit in this little tiny box on your phone, or on your computer screen, and you're not looking at objects in your environment like swooping birds and things like that, which I'm guessing many of you are not spending your time doing, well, these mechanisms for smooth pursuit will get worse over time. Your vision will get worse. And so, while I prefer that people get out into the real world and experience smooth pursuit tracking of visual objects, I don't know, maybe it's a good reason to go to a hockey game or, you know, and try and keep your eye on the puck, which I can never seem to do. It moves so fast. Or I guess this is a good reason to watch live sports if that's your thing, or to watch a tennis match, like a cat, like a kitten, watching the ball go back and forth, whatever, watching kids play, it doesn't really matter. The idea is that you want to use the visual system regularly for what it was designed for, and smooth pursuit is a great way to keep the visual and motion tracking systems of the brain and the eye and the extraocular muscles working in a really nice coordinate fashion. I would say five to 10 minutes, three times a week will be great. If you care about your vision, you can train your vision in this way. The other one is to train accommodation. There are a lot of videos out there, I want to be clear, on the internet, some of which are from clinicians, some of which are not. Some of which are from scientists, some of which are from other sources, talking about things you can do to make your vision better, to improve your vision. Most of those are geared toward improving the extraocular eye muscles, but I did consult with our chair of ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine, Jeff Goldberg, who's an MD and a PhD, a phenomenal scientist, and a phenomenal clinician, and incidentally, a phenomenal chairman as well, about what sorts of things, tools, are actually beneficial for pattern vision and sight, because there's just so much out there on the internet. Not all of which is accurate or good, frankly. And he agreed that a smooth pursuit stimulus, that kind of training, as well as, or exercise, as well as near far. So spending a few minutes, you might even just do this for two minutes of looking at something up close, that's going to activate these accommodation mechanisms, and then moving it at arms length, and focusing on it for five, 10 seconds, maybe more, maybe 15 or 20 seconds, then slowly moving it into a location, and then out. This is actually a lot like the visual training that's done post-concussion to try and repair, actually repair some of the balance, and motor, and visual, and cognitive aspects of the brain. And we are going to have a guest on at a future time that, to deal with concussion and some post-concussion training. A lot of post concussion recovery and training centers around the visual system. Not just because people are trying to recover their vision and their sense of balance, but because, as I mentioned earlier, the brain's ability to make sense of its environment, and the brain's ability to parse time, not just on the day-night schedule, but also shorter time intervals, follows the visual system. Something we'll turn to a little bit more at the end. So what does this mean? The tool is, spend two to three minutes doing smooth pursuit. There's some programs on YouTube, or you can just look up smooth pursuit stimulus, and I'll provide a link to a couple I like as well. You could do this with a pen if you wanted. You could do this. Someone else could hold a wand, and you could do that, if you've got someone that can do that for you. Practice accommodation for a few minutes, maybe every other day, just bringing something in close. You'll feel the strain of your eyes doing that. I can feel it right now, move it out. You'll feel a relaxation point. Move it past that relaxation point, where you will have to do what's called the vergence eye movement to maintain focus on that location as it moves out, bring it back in. At the point where you actually have to go cross-eyed, this will differ for different people, depending on how far apart your eyes are, so called interpupillary distance. So for me, I have been teased before, I have a very short interpupillary distance. I'm not a cyclops, but I'm heading there. Some people are more walleyed, like a flounder. Well, depending on your interpupillary distance, the point at which things get blurry and cross-eyed will vary. But for me, you know, as I get about, oh gosh, I guess it's about six inches from my nose. It's really hard, I can't accommodate any longer. I move it out another inch, and everything's in nice focus. Try and see whether or not you can get things closer. Now, you don't want to get cross-eyed. Remember what your parents told you, or my parents told me, that if you cross your eyes, when you're young, that they can stay that way. Actually, they won't necessarily stay that way, but your brain can start losing information and the ability to see binocular depth, something we'll talk about in a moment. But for now, the protocol would be, you know, two to three, maybe five minutes, just practice that, practice accommodation, and then be sure to give your eyes some rest, get outside, look at a horizon, or do nothing, just kind of let your eyes go soft. I guess what the yogis would call soft gaze. Just kind of relax your eyelids, not this, not eyes closed. Just relaxed, panoramic vision, try and see the walls around you without moving your head. Exercise your eye muscles, exercise the accommodation mechanisms of your eyes, practice a little bit of smooth pursuit. You don't have to be neurotic about this, but if you do this often enough, meaning every other day, every third day or so, you can be the strange person on the plane or in the classroom doing this. You know, that people might chuckle or look at you funny, or tease you, but that's okay, because you'll be able to see when they are losing their vision, so you'll get the last laugh. Please don't laugh at them, but maybe you can help them. At that point, you can hold the pen for them. It's worth doing. It's really worth preserving your vision. And again, if you're a young person, this is great, because then you can actually build an extra strong visual system, using all the tools that we're describing. I do want to talk about a new set of findings that are related to red light and offsetting age-related macular degeneration. There are a lot of ways in which our visual system gets worse over time, but one is so called age-related macular degeneration. Glen Jeffrey at the University College London, somebody I've known for decades as a, because he's a scientist, has done beautiful work on development and function of the visual system, has published a number of papers recently, one that got a particularly high amount of attention in the press was one that showed that flashing red light into the eyes early in the day, not late in the day, early in the day, can help offset some age-related macular degeneration, presumably by enhancing the mitochondrial function in the photoreceptors. There does seem to be some evidence for that. Although, it's still early days, I want to emphasize you don't want to shine really bright lights into your eyes. You never want to look at any light that's so bright that it's painful, and you never want to force your eyelids to stay open. If you need to close your eyes in order to be comfortable, well, then chances are that light is too bright. But doing just a couple minutes a day, like two minutes a day of flashing this red light into one eye, and then the other. As long as it was early in the day before noon time, and as long as it was in individuals that were 40 years or older, did seem to have a significant effect in offsetting some of the age-related macular degeneration that would otherwise occur. Again, these are early findings. If you want to do this, please be careful. Please talk to your optometrist and/or ophthalmologist. Your eyesight is precious. You don't want to damage it, but it is interesting. And it does seem like red light can improve the function of the mitochondria. These photoreceptors have a lot of mitochondria, the energy-producing organelles within the cells, because they are some of the most metabolically active cells in your entire body. Your photoreceptors are active all the time as you're looking around, and even when your eyes are closed, they're active. In fact, through a weird twist of the biology, and please look this up if you're really interested in this, your photoreceptors are actually most active in the dark. This is so weird. It's a twist of biology, the way the system's arranged, that when light comes on, they shut off their activity. So actually whether or not you see something in front of you, like this pen or my face, is because the way your photoreceptors are turning off not turning on. It's a really cool twist, and I don't want to go too far down that rabbit hole, but check it out if you're interested in how photoreceptors work. It's an absolutely incredible literature. Just Google, excuse me, look up on the web. We are not partial just to Google. I happen to use Google, but use your web browser to look up photoreceptors hyperpolarization site. And you can learn a lot about that, if you're a real nerd for this stuff, like I am. Okay, so red light to the eye, can perhaps, it seems, help maintain vision, doing smooth pursuit exercises, and accommodation near-far exercises. Some people suffer from poor eyesight, simply because their eyes get dry. There are incredible, believe it or not, lubricating mechanisms for the eye, not just tears, but a thin sheet of oil. I mean, it's just amazing. Unless you have some sort of corneal abrasion, the cornea is the clear stuff on the outside of your eye, corneal abrasion, when you blink, it's smooth, you don't feel it. It's just really, really smooth. And yet, if you've ever had a corneal scratch, I've had this, it's really rough, it is so painful. You have a ton of pain receptors in the cornea. The lubrication of the cornea is supported by blinking. And while it seems a little silly, some people actually benefit from doing some, you know, five or 10 or 15 seconds of blinking, and then doing their focused work. Some people, their eyes are drying out, because as we focus, if we're trying to do something, our eyelids stay open, the eyes can dry out, but it also can make it such, that when we blink the next time, there's a kind of a need to focus, because there's some distortions in these oils and liquids across the corneal surface. If you're somebody who suffers from dry eye, I do hope they'll find a treatment or a cure for dry eye soon. There isn't one at present. Someone stands to make a lot of money out there if you can find a cure for dry eye. Let the companies know or start a company, right now it's still a mystery as to how to do that. But blinking for five 15 seconds, probably slowly, not as quickly as I'm doing here on video, but just, you know, maybe a blink every a second or two for 15 seconds can lubricate the eyes. And that's not directly related to anything neural, it's just going to allow the optics of your eye to be clear. Just like when the screen of your phone gets dirty, like when Costello's texting on my phone, and I pick it up, and it's like covered with smudge, to clean it off in order to see things clearly, the same thing is happening for these optical devices on the front of your brain. Remember, these are brain. Okay, so a lot of protocols today, almost all of them behavioral protocols. I do want to talk a little bit more about vision and how it works internally. And then I also want to talk about some of the foods and supplements that have been shown to support vision and offset visual loss, and maybe even reverse some visual loss. Let's talk about binocular vision and lazy eye. I'm very familiar with lazy eye, because when I was a kid, I went swimming one day, one day, and I didn't have my goggles. And so, something must have been happening, as I recall, with the eye moving down through the water, I've always had this problem that I can only do the freestyle stroke off to one side. The people I swim with are always laughing. Somehow, I kind of move toward drowning when I try and breathe on the right side. I think there's some asymmetry in the way I'm organized. Anyway, I was off to my left, and my eye kept going in and out of the water, and there was chlorine in the water, and it was making my own uncomfortable, so I just closed my eye. I just decided, you know, I knew more or less how to swim straight-ish. Might've bounced off the lane lines a few times, but I just use the other eye to kind of steer for that mark on the wall. Got out of the pool, took a shower, dried off, and then completely lost by binocular vision for three days, completely. The young brain, up until about age seven, but maybe even extending out until about age 12 is extremely vulnerable to differences in ocular input between the two eyes. My scientific great-grandparents won the Nobel Prize for discovering so called critical periods, periods of time in which the brain is more plastic, more able to change. Those two guys, David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel, thank you, David and Torsten, forever changed the face of visual neuroscience and forever changed the way we think about treatment of the young brain. It used to be thought that you wouldn't want to do a surgery on a young kid, because of risk of anesthesia in young individuals. But we now know that you need to repair these imbalances, that even a few hours, okay, I don't want to scare anybody, I'll talk about reversal. But a few hours of occluding one eye early in life can lead to permanent, unless something's done, permanent changes in the way that the brain perceives the outside world, such that when that eye is opened up again, the brain actually can't make sense of anything that's coming through it. It shuts down that visual pathway somehow. So what happened to me was, I actually was, my eye was fine. I got out of the pool, I opened my eye, but I couldn't see through that eye. Everything was blurry, double vision, unless I covered this eye, and then I could see perfectly fine. Fortunately, I went to an ophthalmologist who understood the literature. Thank you, Dr. Mark Lurie, who understood the literature and made it clear that what I needed to do was to occlude the other eye, the eye that was working very well. Clearly, he understood the work of you Huber and Wiesel. Now, again, you don't want to start playing games with this kind of stuff when you're a kid. If you wear, let's say you have a Halloween costume and you wear an eye patch, you're a pirate or something for Halloween, and you cover it up on one side, probably for the night of Halloween, it's okay. I do not recommend doing that recreationally if you don't need that if you're a young child or for your child to do that. Because, indeed, you create imbalances in the brain machinery that compares information coming in through the two eyes, and it can shut down the neural information for the occluded, the closed eye. Now, I was able to reverse this issue, but my binocular vision has never been terrific. I'm much better at the dart board and still not very good if I close one eye. I'm much better at the pool table, if I close one eye, and I still am terrible. I was the kid in, you know, in the outfield. You know, the ball is coming towards me, the ball's coming towards me, I'm going to catch the ball, and like it hit me square in the lip. My binocular vision isn't great as a consequence of this early event. And I have a hard time with those binocular stereograms, those images that are kind of, you're supposed to look at them, and then the binocular depth image like pops out. All the other kids were going, oh, there's the, whatever, the Statue of Liberty. There's the [inaudible], and I see dots. Okay, so I have binocular vision, but I use other cues. I use the near-far cues that I talked about before. Motion parallax, the fact that things are closer to me are moving faster than things further away, in order to judge depth. And years later, when I got involved in, and I don't suggest this for most people, I got involved in boxing and martial arts when I was younger. You sometimes will see fighters, this is a slip to avoid getting punched. It's also generating motion parallax. Many animals judge depth by moving their head, not by using other mechanisms of accommodation, okay? So a lot of birds and monkeys and animals will judge depth by moving their head like this, or they'll move from side to side. Animals that will undulate sometimes are actually doing a depth measurement, because as you move from side to side, the brain is able to do the math of depth. So what does this all mean in terms of protocols? If you're a young person, do your best to get really good binocular vision, not just at level of your phone or your tablet, but also at distance, you will build strong binocular visual machinery in the brain and at the level of the eyes and the eye musculature. Now, if you're somebody who did have an occlusion, what's needed is to cover up the other eye to create an imbalance, so that the weak eye, the so-called lazy eye, this is sometimes referred to as amblyopia, that eye has to work harder. So for me, they patched this other eye and made this eye, eventually, I got vision through that eye back. then they opened them both up. Now, you might ask, what happens if you cover both eyes early in life? And this is where it gets interesting. You might think, well, if covering one eye leads to poor vision for that eye after that eye is open, covering both eyes will probably make you blind, right? Actually, that's not what happens. What Hubel and Wiesel discovered and what's been affirmed many, many more times over in subsequent studies is that it's competitive, that the two eyes are competing for real estate up in the brain. So if you actually cover both eyes, you actually extend the period of critical plasticity. This is a really interesting aspect that other people are starting to leverage now, in terms of how to reopen plasticity later in life. But please don't, you know, go around with your eyes covered for too long. There are some like retreats and stuff where people go into caves with absolutely no vision. It creates hallucinations. We'll talk about why that is in just a moment, but here's my suggestion. Try and get balanced visual input through the two eyes. Almost everybody has a dominant eye. It usually doesn't relate to your dominant hand, although it can. And so for me, if I cover up my right eye, I see much less well, much more poorly. It's a little bit fuzzy, and I have to work harder in order to see the camera for instance. Then, if I cover up my left eye, it's actually really easy for me to relax. I have a dominant eye. Now, you can balance that out by covering up the dominant eye a little bit each day, but I would warn any young people, meaning, you know, 12 or younger, against creating these imbalances if there isn't a clinical need to do that. And if you do have strong imbalances between the two eyes, which can be caused by cataract and lens issues, can be caused by neuromuscular issues, et cetera, to try and get those dealt with as early as possible by contacting a really good ophthalmologist and ideally a neuro-ophthalmologist. It is very normal, I should say, it's very common for young children, babies to have an eye that, with strabismus, that either deviates out or that deviates in. It is important to correct that. If you would like to have balanced division between the two eyes and for the brain to respond equally to the two eyes and to have, I would say high fidelity, quality vision. Although some people who have an eye that drifts can function normally in life, you have an opportunity early in life to rescue that. I won't do, well, maybe I will do this, but I can actually relax this eye. It's so weak, in some cases, that it actually can start to deviate. Here, I'll just do this here. It's not crossing my eyes. So I actually can move my, I can misalign my eyes, because I have to fight very hard to have the musculature for this eye, keep that eye aligned with the other eye. And that's because I've been doing eye exercises, since I was in my twenties, 'cause I noticed when I would study a lot, this eye would start to drift in, I'd start to see double, and I would then, next thing you know, I was just covering the eye up, and it was getting weaker and weaker, just like the atrophy of a muscle. So I went to the doctor, what did they do? They did the exact wrong thing. The optometrist I went to gave me a prism, which adjusted it so that I could see things normally, which just made the eye weaker and weaker. It's like putting a weak arm into a sling. So I had to spend at least three years of 10 minutes a day, is what I recommend, doing near-far, covering up my good eye, doing near-far with my bad eye. And now, it's been about 10, 12 years that I have pretty decent binocular vision. Now, many of you aren't dealing with this, or have these early childhood issues. Some of you might be experiencing challenges with fatigued eyes or with differences in focus with the two eyes. These eye exercises of near-far, smooth pursuit, and checking for dominant and non-dominant eye can be very beneficial. I'm again, I'm not a clinician, so I don't want to, you know, give you protocols or enforce protocols on anybody. You need to figure out what's right and safe for you, given your vision history. I do recommend talking to a really good ophthalmologist if you have severe vision problems of any kind, or if you want to offset vision problems of any kind. An optometrist as well, but ideally would be a neuro-ophthalmologist. Okay, I did mention hallucinations, and they're fun to talk about and think about. And for years, people have asked, why do people get visual hallucinations. Costello's in sleep right now, you can probably hear him snoring, he's snoring so loud. He's probably having hallucinations about rabbits, pizza, and those are mainly his favorite, and sleep. He's dreaming about sleep in sleep. Hallucinations are a property of the visual system, and it was always thought that hallucinations arise, because of over-activation or activation of certain aspects of the visual system. I just briefly want to mention a paper that was published by my good friend and phenomenal scientist and physicist for that matter, Cris Niell who's up at the University of Oregon in Eugene. They studied LSD light compounds and discovered that hallucinations actually occur, because portions of your brain become underactive. The visual portions of your brain are under-stimulated. This is probably why, when people go into these cave retreats, something I've never done, I don't think I ever will do, where it's completely black, pretty soon, they start hallucinating. They start seeing things, even though there's nothing there. The visual system is desperate to make guesses about what's out in the world. It's like the eager beaver of your brain. It's like, what's out there, what's out there, what's out there? Even in low to no vision people, blind people, they are, their brain is going to be making guesses about what's out there in the auditory world. What sounds are there? What touch sensations are there? For sighted folks, it's going to be, what's out there in terms of light? Light is the dominant way. Vision is the dominant way that we evaluate the world around us. So it turns out that hallucinations are an under-activation of the visual system, and then a compensatory, a compensation, by which the visual system creates activity and hallucinations. So if you're in the dark long enough, you start to hallucinate and see things. So, that's a little note about hallucinations. One of the things that you can do to improve your vision, and it's also kind of fun is to put a Snellen chart in your home. A Snellen chart is that list of letters. Or if you go to the dreaded Department of Motor Vehicles, actually I'm up for renewal soon, so I love the Department of Motor Vehicles. The Department of Motor Vehicles, they'll have you cover up an eye, read the letters on the chart, the letters of course gets smaller and smaller, they're trying to figure out roughly what your vision is. Cover up the other eye, you'll do that. Some people including nerdy, vision scientists like me have had Snellen charts in their office or in their home for many years now, and you can just practice, and you can see how you're doing sitting at a particular distance. Your, this is something that's not often mentioned, but your performance on the Snellen chart will vary depending on time of day, because your level of fatigue and your ability to control that accommodation and other mechanisms of the eye muscles will vary, so you can take it as an average. It's also a good thing, if you're going to get your vision tested for corrective lenses, or maybe you're going to do laser surgery, or something of that sort, if you're thinking about any of that, to really get it measured by a professional. The ones that you get in those supermarkets, or in many eyeglass stores, apologies to the eyeglass stores, are often wrong by an order of magnitude. And then, when you start putting corrective lenses on that are over-correcting or under-correcting, but more often are over-correcting, well, then you're essentially weakening the system. It's like putting a prosthetic on a limb that you didn't necessarily need, or robot arm when you didn't need the use of the robot arm. Although now there's so much excitement about robots, I think people are going to be doing that anyway. Nonetheless, get your vision tested by somebody who really understands vision, like an ophthalmologist or a really good optometrist. If you put a Snellen chart in your home, you know, you can do that as part of your visual training. Now, this might seem excessively nerdy, but what is more important than your eyesight, right? Eyesight is so vital. It's right up there with movement and our ability to move, to generate, to get up out of chairs, and to walk and to run, and to take care of ourselves. Eyesight and movement are the main ways that we are able to take care of ourselves and take care of others. When you start having compromised eyesight or compromised movement, people need to take care of us, and we become much more challenged in moving through our daily life. So while it might seem nerdy to have a Snellen chart in your home, or to do a smooth pursuit exercise a couple of times a week, or to get outside for a few hours a day and do your reading or your laptop work there, preserving your eyesight and preserving your vision is one of the most life-enhancing or quality of life enhancing things that you can do. And if you're a young person, and you can build some of this into your framework of exercise or brain training, if you want to call it that, that can be immensely beneficial and will really set you up to have really good vision over a long period of time. Now, of course, there are genetic factors, and there are injury-related factors that can compromise eyesight and our ability to see. And, of course, the things I'm talking about today aren't going to solve all those issues, but they can have a tremendous, positive impact if you're willing to do just a little bit of work, and none of this is involving any cost, right? It's just time cost. So I want, I do want to talk about a few other things that can perhaps improve vision. I want to dispel a few myths about stuff to take to improve vision. And then, I want to just close by talking about how we perceive time using our vision, because that will nicely set the stage for what we're going to talk about next episode. So now, you understand a lot about the biology of vision. You understand that light has to arrive at the retina and get converted into electrical signals. That process requires things like vitamin A, a fat soluble vitamin. It requires things like the carotinoids. That metabolic cascade, the biochemical cascade, is essential for vision. And this is why you've been told that carrots help you see better 'cause they're high in vitamin A. There are a few simple things you can do to support your vision. First of all, it is true that eating vegetables, the dark, leafy vegetables and things like carrots that have vitamin A in abundance, and eating them in close to their raw form, so naturally occurring foods that contain a lot of vitamin A in their raw form can help support vision. Now, does that mean that if you ingest super physiological amounts of that stuff, that it's going to make your vision that much better? No, but you do need a threshold level of vitamin A in order to see and in order to see well. Now, there's a lot of excitement nowadays about supplementation to help support the health of the visual system. And I'm somebody who's pretty open to novel forms of supplementation. You've probably gathered that, if you've been listening to this podcast for awhile. You have to determine what's safe, and economical, and right for you, what your risk tolerance is, et cetera. But I want to talk about a molecule that's in a lot of supplements to support vision, and there are some really good data on, and that's lutein. Now, the study I want to describe is actually published in 2016. It's from the Journal of Ophthalmology. It's a good journal. And the title of this paper is, it might catch your attention, it's "Increased macular pigment optical density," that just means that macula, is an area of the eye for central vision, for high acuity vision. Pigment density there is good, you want pigment there. "Increase macular pigment optical density "and visual acuity," Visual acuity is your ability to see things in fine detail. "Following consumption of a buttermilk drink "containing lutein-enriched egg yolks." Remember, raw foods? Lutein-enriched egg yolks. Sounds like a Rocky movie, where he would drink the raw egg yolks. "A randomized double-blind placebo controlled trial." Now, I'm not suggesting you go out and eat raw egg yolks. There's the risk of salmonella. Although, I did hear this, someone correct me if I'm wrong, but the salmonella is actually on the outside of the egg, not actually in the egg itself, it's on the shell. For reasons that relate to how that egg got into the world, that's where the salmonella lives, but I could be wrong about that. But raw egg yolks are not something that most people want to consume. What is this lutein stuff? Well, lutein is in the pathway that relates to vitamin A and the formation of the OPs in the photopigment that captures light in the back of your eye, literally absorbs light pigment in your eye, and converts that into electrical signals, and allows you to see. And there is some evidence, I spoke to our chair of ophthalmology, there is some evidence through quality peer-reviewed studies that supplementing with lutein can help offset some of the detrimental effects of age-related macular degeneration. But, I want to emphasize but, or emphasize however, only for individuals with moderate to severe macular degeneration. For people that have normal vision, or with a, just a low-degree of macular degeneration, these studies did not see a significant improvement of vision from supplementing with lutein. So, I'm not going to to tell you to supplement with lutein or not. I don't think any study is holy, but it does seem that if you have moderate to severe macular degeneration, talk to your physician, of course, talk to your ophthalmologist, I'll always say that, and I'll say it three times, supplementing with lutein could perhaps support vision and offset some vision loss in that case. Probably also talk to your ophthalmologist or consider the red light therapy that I talked about earlier. Whereas, if you have normal vision, or a low amount of macular degeneration, it does not seem, at least from these studies, that lutein had much of an effect. Now, I know, and I confess I'm sort of of the mind that if I personally had age-related macular degeneration, or a propensity for it in my family, which fortunately I don't, but in that case, I would think that supplementing with lutein, provided it's safe, could perhaps be of benefit. You might want to consider a low dose of that. So again, I'm not pushing any of this on anybody by any means, but you should know that, under certain conditions of severe macular degeneration or moderate macular degeneration, it does seem like lutein can be beneficial. It does not have to be consumed through raw egg yolks, although that is the highest density source. Cooking the egg yolk, cooking your eggs, if you like your scrambled eggs dry, or you like your eggs not easy over or whatever, not runny, then you aren't going to get the benefits of the leucine. There are other sources of leucine, non-animal sources of leucine as well. You can look those up on the internet. Now, there are other compounds that have been shown to perhaps be important for offsetting or helping different forms of vision loss. One is, I'm going to spell this out, I-D-E-B-E-N-O-N-E, idebenone, idebenone, idebenone, I can never pronounce these compounds, forgive me, unless I've worked with them. There is evidence that it can be beneficial for Leber's congenital eye disease. I would definitely go on to examine.com, put in I-D-E-B-N-O-N-E. And for things like Leber's optic neuropathies, which is a degenerative condition of the eye, whether or not people should just be taking this stuff anyway is still an open question. There aren't a lot of studies about it. A lot of people that are interested in taking things to support their vision are taking lutein as a preventative measure. I don't pass any judgment one way or the other. Typically, those supplements also include the zeaxanthins and astaxanthins. Okay, the pronunciation of this is terrible, I'm sure, but that's not too far off, but basically Z-E-A-X-A-N-T-H-I-N. You can see why it's hard to pronounce, Z-E-A-X-A-N-T-H-I-N. And the other one is A-S-T-A-X-A-N-T-H-I-N. Both of these have been shown, excuse me, both of these have been shown to offset some of the disruption in vision that occurs with aging. What is astaxanthin? It's a really interesting compound. It's the red-pink pigment found in various seafoods. So shrimp, I'm not a big seafood fan, but like certain fish, like the, you'll see at the fish market will have that red-pink pigment. And it's also in the feathers of flamingos, please don't eat the feathers of flamingos, and please also don't eat flamingos. It's structurally similar to betacarotene, so it's very pro vitamin A, but it has some chemical differences, which may make it safer than vitamin A. Remember, vitamin A is a lipid-soluble vitamin, so it can be stored in our body for long periods of time. What is the deal with this astaxanthin? You know, what are its drawbacks? Well, we can go to our ever favorite examine.com. What does it do? Well, it has a number of different effects, a huge number in fact, but it does seem to notably increase, it's now been shown in three studies, the antioxidant enzyme profile. It has a number of different effects, but the most notable for sake of this episode, is the one on ocular blood flow. It does seem to increase the amount of ocular blood flow, so the blood supply to the eyes, so that makes it an interesting compound. It has a number of other effects. For whatever reason, it also has a notable effect, several studies have shown this, on fertility in males. So it seems to at least double the pregnancy rate when men take astaxanthin and works as, in particular, it seems here in men that were previously infertile. So, I don't know if that has something to do with the blood flow to the eyes, probably not. It probably has something to do with something unrelated to the eyes. Nonetheless, that's an effect of this molecule. It's also been shown to have positive effects on things like skin elasticity, skin moisture, skin quality, et cetera, probably due to its effects on blood flow. So lutein, astaxanthin, A-S-T-A-X-A-N-T-H-I-N, and for people who have concerns about Leber's optic neuropathies, which is going to be a small percentage of people out there, but that is a pretty severe condition, there are supplements that are available out there. I do encourage you, as always, to talk to your ophthalmologist and physician about them. And I will say that there are a number of people that take lutein and some of these other things as a precautionary measure, in order to bolster their health in the same way that some people take vitamins and minerals to bolster their health, and some people are very health, excuse me, and some people are very averse to taking vitamins and minerals, 'cause they feel like they can get all that from healthy, whole foods. And of course, you can get these things from whole foods. The question is whether or not you can get them in concentrations that are sufficient. I do think that in the years to come, we are going to see more about lutein. I think we are going to see more about some of these other compounds like astaxanthin, and hopefully by then I'll be able to pronounce it. But, at present, these things are more or less in the kind of experimental or self-experimental phase. There are some good double-blind placebo controlled studies, like the egg yolk buttermilk study of all things published in really good journals. Journal of Ophthalmology, Journal of Investigative Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, these are good journals. These are journals are peer-reviewed by experts. The study that I mentioned earlier about keeping rooms dark that was also published in an excellent journal, I think it was JAMA. I'll go back and look, it's not on my screen any longer, but very easy to find, and there been some follow-up studies as well from the University of Pennsylvania and other universities. So everything I've talked about today relates to studies that were done and published in quality, peer-reviewed journals. That doesn't necessarily mean you want to run out and start taking this stuff that I've described, or even doing the protocols I've described, I've given you an array, a palette, a buffet if you will, of things that you could do to try and enhance or support your vision. Depending on how good your vision is, your family history of vision and vision loss, your occupational hazards. You know, people that work with metal filings that are flying out of machines are going to have a higher degree of vision, you know, risk to their visual system than well, people who just do office work. Although, if you're doing a lot of office work, chances are you're not getting a lot of long-view vision. Your accommodation mechanisms are going to start to suffer over time. I think we can reliably predict that. So I've tried to give you an array of behavioral tools, and we did touch upon some supplementation tools. I'd be remiss if I didn't say that, because blood flow is so critical for the neurons of the eye, remember, these are the most metabolically active cells in your entire body, the cells within your retina, because blood flow is required to get them the energy and nutrients they need, having a healthy cardiovascular system, right, doing endurance work, doing strength training work regularly, is going to support your eyes, and your brain, and your vision. It's indirect, but it's essential, right? It's necessary, but it's not going to be sufficient. You're going to have to do other things to support your eyesight, as well. But having a healthy cardiovascular system, because it's going to deliver blood and oxygen and nutrients to this incredible apparati on the front of your face, these two pieces of brain, is going to support your overall brain health and vision over time. So early in the podcast, I talked about how the optimal window for learning is 90 minutes. That's the so called ultradian cycle for learning. That's why we had all our episodes to about 90 minutes. They're now starting to extend into the hour and 50 minute and two hour mark. That simply reflects my enthusiasm and excitement about these topics and my desire to give you as much information as I possibly can in each episode. Please remember you don't have to listen to the whole episode all at once. Everything is timestamped. Everything is captioned in English and Spanish. The captions take a few days on YouTube. We apologize for that, but in order to have them done correctly, it takes a few days after it's posted. So if you need those captions, please check back maybe 24 or 48 hours after the episodes are released. If you're enjoying this podcast and the information, if you're finding it beneficial, there are a couple of things that you can do that are totally zero cost that really help us and help you get this information going forward. One is, if you don't already subscribe on YouTube, please do subscribe. We release episodes every Monday, and hopefully soon more often than that, shorter episodes as well. But every Monday we release an episode, please do subscribe. If you don't already subscribe on Apple and Spotify, that's very beneficial, please do that. That helps us as well. If you could give us a five-star review on Apple, if you feel that that's what we deserve, and Apple also gives you the opportunity to give us comments, feedback about the episodes. If you have suggestions about episodes, feedback of any kind, please put it in the comment section on YouTube. Routinely throughout the week, after the release of each episode, I cover content in shorter format and in more depth on Instagram @hubermanlab. Every episode is also indexed and searchable in the search function on our website hubermanlab.com. That's also where we post links to various studies and downloadable protocols, all zero cost. And as I mentioned, you can search for different topics, and it will bring you to the particular episodes that contain the information on those topics. If you'd like to support us on Patreon, we have a Patreon account, it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. There you can support us at any level that you like. As well, if you'd like to support us, please check out our sponsors. The sponsors that we discussed at the beginning of the podcast are a vital way to keep the information being distributed at zero cost to everybody. We only work with sponsors that we really love their products and that we really respect the people that we're working with there. And of course, there's no obligation to purchase or to even check out those sponsors, but if you're in a position to do so, that really does help us. Routinely throughout the podcast, we talk about supplements. There are a lot of supplement companies and sources of supplements out there. The one that we work with and that we partnered with is Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E, because Thorne has the highest levels of stringency, in terms of what they say is in their supplements is actually in their supplements, because it's independently tested and verified. As well as the amounts that they list on the bottles actually are matched by what's in the capsules and tablets. That's a serious problem in the supplement industry, and Thorne deals with that problem by being very truthful and very accurate about what's in their supplements and how much of those things are in there. If you want to see the supplements that I take, you can go to Thorne, thorne.com/u/huberman. There, you'll see all the supplements that I take. You can get 20% off any of those supplements, as well as 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne happens to make, if you happen to navigate into their website through that portal, thorne.com/u/huberman. And last but not least, I want to thank you for your time and attention today. Your willingness to learn about vision and the visual system and the various things that you can do to help support the health and functioning of your visual system. And of course, I want to thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 324 ---
Video ID: VQLU7gpk_X8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VQLU7gpk_X8
Title: How to Build Endurance in Your Brain & Body
Published: 2021-06-07 12:00:11 UTC
Description:
This episode I discuss endurance: our ability to perform effort over extended amounts of time. I describe the four kinds of endurance: muscular endurance, long duration (single-set) efforts, and the two kinds of high intensity interval training (HIIT). I discuss efficiency of effort and maximizing quality of effort, and a hydration formula. I review how our heart literally gets stronger when we oxygenate muscles properly. I also discuss motivation for long bouts of work and the visual physiological basis of the "extra gear" we all can leverage for effort. Finally, I review how accelerating as we fatigue can allow us to access untapped energetic resources. 

Thank you to our sponsors:
ROKA - https://www.roka.com - code: huberman
InsideTracker - https://www.insidetracker.com/huberman
Athletic Greens - https://www.athleticgreens.com/huberman

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab

Website: https://hubermanlab.com
Join the Neural Network: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Mechanistic review of training adaptations:
http://perspectivesinmedicine.cshlp.org/content/8/6/a029769.full.pdf

Protocols: 
https://hubermanlab.com/how-to-build-endurance-in-your-brain-and-body/

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introduction 
00:05:45 Why Everyone Should Train Endurance
00:09:49 All Episodes Now Searchable at hubermanlab.com & The Neural Network
00:11:28 How To Maintain Muscle 
00:12:56 Endurance: It’s Not What You Think, Crossover With Brain Function
00:14:38 Energy; Many Paths To ATP: Creatine, Glucose, Glycogen, Fat; Ketones
00:18:00 The Vital Need For Oxygen: But Why?
00:19:00 What Allows Us To Endure (Anything)?
00:20:46 The 5 Things That Allow Us To Persist/Endure & What Causes Quitting
00:22:50 Why You Quit: It IS All In Your Mind
00:27:19 The “90% Mental” Myth
00:28:10 The Critical Need For Carbohydrates & Electrolytes (& Sometimes Ketones)
00:30:10 Phospho-Creatine, Glycogen, pH, Temperature Is Key
00:31:36 Using Your Blood, Heart, & Lungs To Go Longer, Further, With More Intensity
00:35:40 An Excellent Review on the Science of Training Adaptations (See Caption On YouTube)
00:37:15 The 4 Kinds of Endurance 
00:38:53 Muscular Endurance: Powerful for Everyone: Posture, Performance, Resilience
00:41:50 Protocol For Building Muscular Endurance. No Major Eccentric Component
00:48:40 How to Make Muscles More Resilient: Mitochondrial Respiration, Neuronal Firing
00:51:31 Long Duration Endurance: 12minutes or More, One “Set”, Efficiency of Movement
00:57:00 Why Everyone Should Train Long Duration Endurance: Capillaries In Muscle & Brain
01:01:00 Two Distinct Types of High-Intensity Interval Training: Anaerobic & Aerobic
01:02:20 Anaerobic HIIT: 3-12 Sets, Work:Rest Ratio of 3:1 or 1:3; Quality of Repetitions is Key
01:07:00 Maximizing Oxygen Utilization, Heart Rate & Nerve-Muscle Energy Utilization
01:10:59 Aerobic HIIT; 1:1 Work:Rest Ratio, Tapping Into All Energy Utilization Systems
01:15:20 Building A Stronger Heart & Better Brain: Eccentric Loading the Heart: Stroke Volume
01:20:10 Resistance & Weight Training: Useless for the Brain? What Is Good For the Brain?
01:23:25 The Strength-Endurance Tradeoff; How Long to Wait Between Workouts
01:25:45 Breathing During Endurance, Explosive and Weight Training: Nose, Mouth, Gears
01:29:50 Intercostals & Diaphragmatic Breathing: Warming Up Intercostals Is Useful
01:31:00 Increasing Motivation & Adrenaline
01:32:10 Eliminating the “Side Cramp” With Physiological Sighs
01:34:45 Accelerating Through “The Wall”: Accessing Alternative Fuel Sources; Ketone Use
01:37:50 Hydration: Why Hydrate, How To Hydrate, & How Much Fluid To Drink
01:41:35 “The Galpin Equation”; Gastric Emptying Time, Adapting Hydration Mid-Training
01:44:20 Boosting Mitochondrial Density With Cold; Wait 6 Hours Before Cold/Between Training
01:46:00 Accelerating Recovery with 5 Minute Parasympathetic Down-Shift After Training
01:48:00 Leveraging The Visual System During Effort, Milestones; Dilation & Contraction; Pacing
01:53:10 The Physiological Basis of Your “Extra Gear”, Accessing Your “Kick”, Steve Prefontaine
01:56:00 Programming Examples; Concurrent Training
01:57:57 Caffeine, Magnesium Malate to Reduce Soreness, Nitric Oxide, Beta-Alanine
02:00:00 Synthesis; Next Episodes, Zero-Cost Ways to Support, Sponsors, Sources

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is ROKA. ROKA makes sunglasses and eyeglasses. And I'm delighted that they're a partner and a sponsor for the podcast. As some of you may already know I've spent two decades or more studying the visual system, how we see? Vision is absolutely the most important sense by which humans navigate the world and survive. And our eyes as two pieces of our brain do many other important things as well. So taking good care of our eyesight is essential. Founded by two All-Americans swimmers from Stanford. ROKA was born out of an obsession for performance. They've carefully put science and purpose behind their design choices and they built absolutely terrific products as a result. The glasses are amazing. I love them because they look great. They are super comfortable and the optical clarity is incredible. They filter out sunlight in a way that still allows you to see contrast and shadows the way you need to. And for me, one of the things that's really irritating is if I have a pair of sunglasses that don't allow me to see all the things I want to see. And with ROKA glasses, I get incredible contrast but then I can also relax and be outdoors in bright light. And as the amount of light changes with cloud cover and things of that sort, my ability to see my surroundings coz it's still really sharp and really clear. And that only comes from really understanding how the visual system works, and how it adjusts to contrast and adaptation and all these different things. They really understand the science and that went into the design of these glasses. And as many of you know, sunlight and the viewing of light is also very important for setting circadian rhythm. So that's also been incorporated into the design and science behind these glasses. I do wear readers. I don't often wear them during the podcast, but I have to wear reading glasses at night. So I use their readers and I own a pair of their sunglasses. And I'm delighted with them. If you'd like to check out ROKA glasses, you can go to www.roka.com, that's R-O-K-A.com and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off your first order. That's R-O-K-A.com, enter the code Huberman at checkout to get 20% off your first order. Today's podcast is also brought to you by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and reach your health goals. I'm a big believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the important things that are vital to our immediate and long-term health can only be detected in a good quality blood test. The problem with blood tests is that most blood tests you get a lot of information back about that are too high or too low of this thing or the other thing. But making sense of that, and what to do with that information is very challenging. Even if you have a really attentive physician, oftentimes it's mysterious as to what to do with all this data. With InsideTracker, they make it very easy to understand what all the metabolic factors, hormone factors, et cetera, mean for you and what to do about those markers. So they offer you directives in terms of nutrition, supplementation, as well as lifestyle factors like exercise, sleep, et cetera, that can allow you to take control of those numbers and bring them into the ranges that are best for you and your long-term health. Another feature of InsideTracker that's great is their inner age test. This test shows you what your biological age and how it compares to your chronological age, which I can only imagine most everybody including me are extremely interested in how long am I likely to live? How old am I really in terms of my biology? If you'd like to try InsideTracker you can visit www.insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Use the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink. I've been using Athletic Greens since 2012, and so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. With athletic greens, you get a ton of factors that are good for you mixed into this one really good tasting drink. I like to mix mine with water and a little bit of lemon juice, and I drink that once or twice a day. Typically, once early in the day, and sometimes also in the afternoon or even evening. I'm able to sleep after drinking in the evening just fine. The reason I been using Athletic Greens for so long that I continue to use Athletic Greens is that, one, I feel better when I take it. I just do. Psychologically, physically, I feel better. But also it covers all my bases of the things that I need for my general health. It's sort of a foundational supplement as I like to call it. In fact, when people ask me, what should I take? If I were to recommend just one supplement that people take it would be Athletic Greens. With Athletic Greens, you get support for your gut which is important, because the gut microbiome is important for the gut brain access, for mood, metabolism, hormones, et cetera. There are so many data that support that statement. As well, there are many factors in Athletic Greens that support general health metabolism, endocrine factors, immunity, et cetera. So with Athletic Greens, I drink it once or twice a day. And I know that I've got all that covered. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to www.athleticgreens.com/huberman. And if you do that, you can claim a special offer. They'll send you five free travel packs plus a year supplies, excuse me, of vitamin D3+K2. So you get the five free travel packs and a year supply of D3 if you go to www.athleticgreens.com/huberman you can claim that special offer. For the last month four episodes to be exact, we've been discussing physical performance and skill learning. We've talked about how to learn skills faster, whether or not those are skills, athletic performance, dance, music, things of that sort. We've also talked about how to gain strength and how to lose fat faster by leveraging the nervous system. Things like shiver and non-shiver, non-exercise activity induced thermogenesis. We talked about how neurons can actually trigger accelerated fat loss. We talked about hypertrophy also called muscle growth and we covered everything from sets and reps protocols, how long to stay in a cold ice bath? When to get out? How to keep shivering? We've covered a lot of tools and a lot of science. So if you're interested in those things and you even perhaps want to learn a little bit about how we make energy ATP from carbohydrates or from fats, it's all covered in the previous four episodes. This was going to be the time that we moved to a new topic entirely, but we are going to do one more episode in this series on physical performance. For the simple reason that you asked many questions about something that's vitally important both for physical performance and long-term and short-term health and that's endurance. And so today we are going to talk about endurance. Now, if you're a strength athlete or you're not interested in endurance, don't depart just yet, because it turns out that there are ways to train endurance that are very different than I would have previously imagined. If you only think about long runs, long swims, marathons, half marathons, 10Ks, 5Ks and that sort of thing puts you to sleep kind of like Costello is snoring in the background right now. He's not a long distance endurance athlete, that's for sure. If you're interested in those things or if you are averse to those things, I encourage you to continue listening because we are going to talk about a little bit of science and then some specific protocols that really define what endurance is? The four types of endurance and ways to train those in concert with the other things that you might be doing like weight training or skill training or yoga. And if you are an endurance athlete, we are going to cover a lot of tools and science that I'm certain will also help enhance your training and performance in races or even just recreationally. The topic of endurance I think has been badly misrepresented, frankly, online. And when you'd start digging into the science and you start talking to real experts in this area, what you discover, what I've discovered is that, it's an incredibly interesting area because it teaches us so much about how our body and our brain use fuels and how we can control which fuels are used by our body and brain? So today we will talk about the four kinds of endurance. We will also cover the topic of hydration which might sound incredibly boring. Like, okay, just drink more water. But it's really interesting because not only is hydration a limiting factor on performance, but there is a right way to hydrate, and there is a wrong way to hydrate. There actually is a formula that I'll teach you to know how much water to be drinking depending on your activity levels. And if that sounds like a simple thing, like, oh, just tap off water until your urine runs clear. That's actually the wrong advice. It turns out that if you don't hydrate properly, you can see 20 to 30% reductions in performance, whether or not that strength, whether that's increasing hypertrophy, whether or not that's running, swimming, even mental performance. So even if you're not an athlete or a recreational athlete at all, I encourage you to stay tuned for the part about hydration. So we're going to cover as usual a little bit of science and then we're going to dive right into protocols that you can apply if you like, and if you deem those correct and safe for you. Before we dive into all that, I want to make an important announcement, which has all the episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast are now housed on a single website, which is www.hubermanlab.com. If you go to www.hubermanlab.com, you can find all the episodes in YouTube, Apple and Spotify format with links there. The website is also searchable. So if you go into the little search function which you'll find very easily, and you put in, for instance, creatine or sleep or ice bath or sauna, it will take you to the specific episodes that contain that information. And in addition, if you go to the website www.hubermanlab.com, you have the opportunity to sign up for what we call the Huberman Lab Neural Network. The Huberman Lab Neural Network is a zero cost resource where once a month perhaps more often you'll receive a email newsletter, and that newsletter will contain specific protocols, announcements, attachments of PDFs and things of that sort of protocols, tools and science from the podcast. We will also make any announcements about live lectures which at some point I'll probably start doing in various cities in the US and probably around the world as well, as well as other things that I think would be really useful to you all of course at zero cost. So that's www.hubermanlab.com, sign up for the Neural Network newsletter. You can find that in the menu tab or it might pop up when you get there. And I hope you will join. And as a final announcement, if you're not already following us on Instagram, you can go to Huberman Lab on Instagram. And if you do that, I often make announcements and release protocols and links to protocols and things there as well. I briefly want to touch on something from the previous episode which is that, if you are somebody that is trying to increase muscle strength and or size, or if you're simply somebody who doesn't want to increase muscle strength and size, and you just want to maintain the musculature that you have, it's vital that you perform at least five sets of resistance training per muscle per week. If we don't do that, we lose muscle over time. And that is one reason among many to have a regular resistance training protocol. Nobody wants to start resembling a folded over envelope or a melted candle. No one wants to have challenges getting up out of a chair or off the ground. Maintaining musculature is vital, not just to our immediate health, but to our long-term health trajectory. So I just want to emphasize that point. If you're curious about the sets, the reps, how close to failure to go or not go? Whether or not you should be doing your cardiovascular training before or after your weight training? All of that is in the previous episode right down to the details, and I like to think made simple for you to understand. But I do strongly believe that resistance training whether or not it's with body weight or bands or weights or simply lifting rocks in the yard or logs in the yard is vital for our systemic physiology and our overall health, and that includes our brain health. And I described the reasons for that and the mechanisms in the previous episode. Today, I'd like to talk about endurance and how to build endurance, and how to use endurance for the health of your entire body. Endurance, as the name suggests is our ability to engage in continuous bouts of exercise, or continuous movement or continuous effort of any kind. And I do believe that our ability to engage in activities that we call endurance training or physical endurance activities do have carry over to mental performance of things that require long-term effort. I'll touch on that at the end and why there's reason to believe that there is a biological crossover between those two things. I don't think it's simply the case that if you train yourself to be a strength and speed athlete and to do short bouts of exercise are very intense, that you can only do mental work that's of short bouts and very intense. But it is clear that cardiovascular exercise, exercise where you're getting your heart rate up continuously for a period of time, and endurance exercise we will define what that is in a moment, is vital for tapping into and enhancing various aspects of our biology in the body end in the brain such that our brain can perform work for longer periods of time, focused work, learning, et cetera. So I want to dive into the topic of endurance and I want to just begin by addressing something that's vital to any kind of effort, whether that's mental effort or physical effort. So as always a little bit of science and we'll get right into protocols. So the key thing to understand about energy production in the body, meaning your ability to think, your ability to talk, your ability to walk, your ability to run is this thing that we call ATP. ATP and mitochondria, which are just little what we call organelles within cells. These little factories that make energy, if you will. ATP is required for anything that requires energy, for anything that you do that requires effort. And there are different ways to get ATP. And we have been gifted as a species with the ability to convert lots of things into ATP. We can convert carbohydrates, literally the kinds of carbohydrates eat a bagel, you eat a piece of pizza. Pizza usually is dough, and it has cheese and some other things. Costello hears me talking about pizza. Costello loves pizza, by the way. Eating a piece of pizza, it gets converted into various things, fatty acids from the fats, glucose from the bread, and those things get converted into ATP within cells, through things like like glycolysis, things like lipolysis. I talked about this in previous episodes. So our muscles and our neurons use different fuel sources to generate ATP. The ones that are used first for short bouts of intense activity are things like phosphocreatine. If you've only heard about creatine as a supplement. Well, phosphocreatine actually exists on our muscles, and that's why people take creatine. You can load your muscles with more creatine. And though, and excuse me. Phosphocreatine is great for short, intense bouts of effort. So when you're really pushing hard on something physical, let's say you see a car on the side of the road and that car is stalled and a person says, "Hey, can you help me push my car?" And you start to push. That's going to be phosphocreatine is going to be your main fuel source. Then you start to tap into things like glucose which is literally just carbohydrate is the sugar that's in your blood. And then if you keep pushing on that car, you keep engaging in a particular effort, or you keep studying or you keep listening to this podcast, you start to tap into other fuel sources like glycogen from your liver, which is just, it's like a little pack, just like you might have packed a sandwich or something for work. You have a little pack of glycogen in your liver that you can rely on. And you have fat stored in adipose tissue. Even if you have very, very low body fat percentage like you're one of these people as like 3% or 5% body fat really thin skin, very little body fat, you can extract lipids fatty acids from that body fat. It's like a storage pack, it is a storage pack for energy that can be converted to ATP. So without going into any more detail, when I say today energy or I say ATP, just remember that regardless of your diet, regardless of your nutritional plan, your body has the capacity to use creatine, glucose, glycogen, lipids. And if you're ketogenic, ketones. We'll talk about ketosis. In order to generate fuel, energy. Now, the other crucial point is that, in order to complete that process of taking these fuels and converting them into energy, most of the time you need oxygen. You need air basically in your system. Now, it's not actual air. You need oxygen molecules in your system, comes in through your mouth and your nose, goes to your lungs and distributes via the bloodstream. Oxygen is not a fuel, but like a fire that has no oxygen you can't actually burn the logs, but when you blow a lot of oxygen onto a fire, basically, onto logs with a flame there, then basically it will take fire, it will burn. Okay? Oxygen allows you to burn fuel. So today we are going to ask the critical questions. What allows us to perform? What allows us to continue effort for long periods of time? And that effort could be a run, it could be a swim, it could be studying, it could be anything that extends over a long period of time. Well, you're going to need energy and you're going to need oxygen. But the way to answer a question like what allows us to endure, right? Endurance. What allows us to keep going? Well, we think of things like willpower. But what's willpower? Willpower is neurons. It's neurons in our brain. We have this thing called the central governor which decides whether or not we should or could continue or whether or not we should stop, whether or not we should quit. Okay? So whether or not you're somebody who has a lot of what we would call resilience and endurance, or whether or not you're somebody who taps out early and quits early or can't handle frustration, that has to do with your fuel utilization and specific neurons. So we have to ask the question, what is the limiting factor on performance? Right? So instead of saying, what allows us to endure? We should say, what prevents us from enduring? What prevents us from moving forward? What are the factors that say, you know what? No more, I'm not going to continue this run. Or you know what? I've had a really long, hard day or maybe I've had an easy day or I'm feeling lazy, I just don't even really feel like getting up and moving. So what we're going to talk about today actually gets right down to the heart of motivation and fuel use. Motivation and fuel allocation. And we are going to talk about specific training protocols that you can follow that have carry over between the bodily systems of running swimming, et cetera, and the way that your brain works. So let's talk about endurance by asking first, what are the limiting factors on endurance? What stops us? Because in addressing that and answering that, we will understand what allows us to get into effort and to continue effort. There are five main categories of things that allow us to engage in effort. And they are neurons, nerves, muscle, muscle, blood, things in our blood, our heart and our lungs. Now, I don't want to completely write off things like the immune system and other systems of the body, but nerve muscle, blood, heart and lungs are the five that I want to focus on today, because that's where most of the data are. As we go forward into this, I want to acknowledge Dr. Andy Galpin, who as with the last episode, has been tremendously helpful and informative in terms of the exercise physiology. He's a true expert. He has a laboratory, he's a full professor who does work on muscle biopsy, who understands the science, but who also works with athletes and works with recreational athletes, professional athletes really understands at a variety of levels how all these systems work? He's the person I consulted with about today's episode, although I did access other literature as well. And I'm going to mention a key review for any of you, afficionados, who really want to get down into the weeds. But I encourage you, if you want more detail to check out Dr. Andy Galpin's YouTube page, I think he's also on Twitter. He's definitely on Instagram. His content is excellent, and he really understands... I have learned and I really believe that an intellectual is somebody who understands a topic at multiple levels of specificity of detail and can communicate that. And Andy is a true intellectual of muscle physiology and performance. And if you hear the word intellectual and you kind of back up and cringe from that, understand that he's also a practitioner. So thank you, Andrew Galpin. Andy Galpin for your support in these episodes and we hope to have you as a guest on the podcast soon. So nerve muscle, blood, heart and lungs. Let's talk about neurons and how they work. Okay? But I want to tell you about an experiment that's going to make it very clear why quitting is a mental thing not a physical thing. So why do we quit? Well, an experiment was done a couple years ago and was published in the journal Cell. Cell Press journal, excellent journal showing that there is a class of neurons in our brain stem, in the back of our brain that if they shut off, we quit. Now, these neurons release epinephrin. Epinephrin is adrenaline. And anytime we are engaged in effort of any kind, we are releasing epinephrin. Anytime we're awake really, we are releasing epinephrin into our brain. In fact, this little roup of neurons in the back of our brain is called the locus coeruleus if you like. It's churning out epinephrin all the time, but if something stresses us out, it churns out more and then it acts as kind of an alertness signal for the whole brain. We also of course have adrenaline epinephrin released in our body which makes our body ready for things. So think about epinephrin as a readiness signal. And when we are engaged in effort, this readiness signal is being churned into our brain. When we relax and we're falling asleep, epinephrin levels are low. Okay, so they did a really interesting experiment where they had subjects engage in bouts of effort of trying to move forward toward a goal. But they manipulated the visual environment with the stripes, kind of like fences passing on both sides of them. And by doing that, they could trick subjects into thinking that their effort was either allowing them to move forward, right? Because these rungs on the fence were moving past, or that their effort was futile that they were no longer moving forward because they would make the runs move slowly even though the subjects were making a lot of effort to move forward. Okay? So this is analogous or similar to being on a treadmill and you're trying to walk on this treadmill and you just can't move the conveyor, right? Or you're in virtual reality and you're putting a ton of effort, but it seems like you're moving excruciatingly slow. I had this experience recently in real life. I was doing a swim in the Pacific, I was trying to go south and I was swimming and I was caught in a current, not the cup that pulls you out to ocean. And I kept looking to my left, and I saw this hotel on the shoreline, and then I was swimming and swimming and swimming and swimming, and 20 minutes later I looked to my left and the hotel is still exactly where it was before, which meant that I wasn't moving. It felt futile. Eventually, either the current changed or something changed and I eventually swam past the hotel, got back on the beach and eventually drove home. That's essentially what they did in this experiment. But what they found was these neurons that release epinephrin, there's another cell type called glia, which actually means glue in Latin, that is paying attention to how much epinephrin is being released. And at some point the system reaches a threshold. It reaches this threshold and it shuts off the release of more epinephrin. It's like I quit, that's it, no more effort signal. If they could extend the time before those glia said, ah, enough. If they could release more adrenaline into the system, then subjects would keep going. So our desire to continue or put differently, our willingness to continue and our desire to quit is mediated by events between our two ears. Now, that doesn't mean that the body's not involved, but it means that neurons are critically important. So we have two categories of neurons that are important. The ones in our head that tell us get up and go out and take that run. And the ones that allow us and encourage us to continue that run, and we have neurons that shut things off and say no more. And we of course have the neurons that connect to our muscles and control our muscles. But the reason we quit is rarely because our body quits, our mind quits. Now, we never want to encourage people to drive themselves to the point of injury, that's not going to be good for anybody, but it is good to know that it's neural. Our ability to persist is neural. So when people say is it, I hear that, you know, sports or effort or fighting, or it's 90% mental, 10% physical. That whole discussion about how much is mental, how much is physical? Is absolutely silly. It just proves that there's no knowledge of the underlying biology behind that statement. It's neither mental nor physical. Everything is physical, everything is neurons. Your thinking is the responsibility of chemicals and electrical signals in your head. So it's not 90% mental, 10% physical. It's not 50/50. It's not 70/30, it's 100% nervous system. It's neurons. Okay? So when people say mental or physical, understand it's 100% neural. And I'd love for the, how much of it is mental and how much is physical to just disappear. That argument means nothing and it's not actionable. Now, what do nerves need in order to continue to fire? What do you need in order to get neurons to say, I will persist. Well, they need glucose. Unless you're on keto and ketogenic adapted, you need carbohydrate is glucose. That's what neurons run on. And you need electrolytes. Neurons have what's called a sodium potassium pump blah, blah, blah. They generate electricity. We could go into all this. I will probably do an entire lecture about the action potential, but basically in order to get nerve cells to fire, to contract muscle, to say, I'm going to continue. You need sufficient sodium, salt, because the action potential the actual firing of neurons is driven by sodium entering the cell, rushing into the cell. And then there's a removal of potassium. And then there's a kind of resetting of those levels by something called the sodium potassium pump. And the sodium potassium pump and sodium and action potentials, even if you don't know anything about that is ATP dependent. It requires energy. So you need energy in order to get neurons to fire. And it is pH dependent. It depends on the conditions or the environment within the brain being of a certain pH or acidity. pH is about how acid or how basic the environment is? And we will talk a little bit about pH in simple terms so you can understand. So nerves need salt, they need potassium. And it turns out they need magnesium and you need glucose and carbohydrates in order to power those neurons, unless you are running on ketones. And to run on ketones, you have to make sure that you're fully keto adapted. I will talk about adding in ketones on top of carbohydrate at the end of the episode. Okay, so that's how nerves work. You need carbohydrate, you need sodium, potassium and magnesium in order to drive the brain. Muscle. Muscle is going to engage in generating energy first by using this phosphocreatine system. High bouts of effort really intense effort, short-lived seconds to minutes, but probably more like seconds is going to be this phosphate creating literally a fuel source in the muscle that you're going to burn, just like you would logs on a fire. And glycogen which is stored carbohydrate in the muscle, that also can be burned just like logs on a fire to generate energy. So let me make this crystal clear. If you move your wrist towards your shoulder and contract your bicep really hard, muscle fibers are burning up their own carbohydrate. They're converting that into ATP in order to generate that energy. Okay? And pH is important and temperature is important. In the episode on supercharge your physical performance, I talked all about how by using cooling specifically of the palms or the bottoms of the feet or the cheeks of the face using particular methods, you can adjust the temperature of the body and of muscle in a way that allows you to do more work, to do more reps, to run further, to keep going and to persist. And that's because if temperature is too low or too high, then ATP is not going to be available because of this whole thing called the pyruvate kinase pathway and the temperature dependence of pyruvate kinase. Check out that episode if you want to learn more about that. But temperature is important and pH is also important. So we got nerve, muscle, and then there's stuff in our blood that's available as an energy source. And in blood, we got glucose. So literally blood sugar that's floating around. So let's say you have fasted for three days, your blood glucose is going to be very low. So that's not going to be a great fuel source, but you will start to liberate fats from your adipose tissue from your fat. Fatty acids will start to mobilize into the bloodstream and you can burn those for energy. And oxygen in your blood when you inhale, [inhales deeply] you're bringing oxygen into your blood. So these are all fuel sources in your neurons, in your muscle, in your blood, in your various tissues that are providing the opportunity to induce effort whether or not it's a run or swim or writing or talking. Now, there are some other factors that are important and those are the heart which is going to move blood. So the more that the heart can move blood and oxygen, well, the more fuel that's going to be available for you to engage in muscular effort and thinking effort. So your heart vitally important to your muscles ability to work and your brain's ability to work. And as I've mentioned, oxygen a few times, it should be obvious then that the lungs are very important. You need to bring oxygen in, and distribute it to all these tissues, because oxygen is critical for the conversion of carbohydrates and the conversion of fats. And we could get into the discussion about whether or not oxygen is important for ketogenic metabolism, but you need oxygen there, you need to breathe and you need to breathe properly. So I just covered what would normally be about four lectures of energy consumption and energy utilization. I didn't go into much detail at all. But what I want you to imagine is that, you've got these different cell types. You've got neurons, you've got muscle, they need to collaborate in order to generate effort or to make the decision to do something or to think hard or to run hard or to run far. And then you've got fuel sources both in the neurons, in the muscle, in your blood, and then the heart and lungs are going to help distribute the oxygen and those fuels. And of course you have that little energy pack that we call the liver that will allow you to pull out a little more carbohydrate if you need it for work. Okay? So that's as much as I want to cover about energy consumption, because that's a lot. But what it tells you is that when you eat and you use food as a fuel source, that food can be broken down and you can immediately burn the glucose that's in your bloodstream, or you can rely on some of the stored fuel in your liver, or you can rely on stored fuel in the muscle, so-called glycogen. And there are a lot of different ways that we can generate ATP. So when we ask the question, what's limiting for performance? What is going to allow us to endure, to engage in effort and endure long bouts of effort or even moderately long bouts of effort? We need to ask which of those things, nerve, muscle, blood, heart and lungs is limiting? Or put differently, we ask, what should we be doing with our neurons? What should we be doing with our muscles? What should we be doing with our blood? What should we be doing with our heart and what should we be doing with our lungs that's going to allow us to build endurance for mental and physical work and to be able to go longer, further with more intensity? That's the real question? How can we do more work? And the way we do that is with energy, and the way to get energy to it, is to buy those five things. And so now we're going to talk about, how you can actually build different types of endurance? And what that does at the level of your blood, your heart, your muscles and your neurons. So we're going to skip back and forth between protocols, tools and the underlying science. So rather than heavy stack the science at the front end and then just give you all the tools at the end, we're going to talk about the protocols, the four kinds of endurance and how to achieve them? And we are going to talk about the underlying science as we move through that. If you would like a lot of detailed science, I encourage you to check out a review that we've linked in the show notes. And the review is called adaptations to endurance and strength training. This is a review article with many excellent citations. It's from Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine. The Cold Spring Harbor Press is an excellent scientific press. Spent the last 21 years doing summers at Cold Spring Harbor teaching neuroscience, but Cold Spring Harbor is involved in all sorts of themes and topics related to neuroscience and medicine. This review by Hughes L.Ellefson. Ellefson that's the name. Ellefson and Barr, B-A-A-R. Adaptations through endurance and strength training is rich with citations. It can be downloaded as a complete PDF. There's no paywall and we will link to it. And it gets really deep into all the signaling cascades, the genetic changes within muscle with high intensity interval training, short-term, super high intensity training, weight training. So if you're a real nerd for this stuff and you want to get right down into how PGC-1alpha, P53 and PH20 change the adaptation features of muscle and gene regulation, that is definitely the review for you. If you're like most people, and you're not really interested in that level of detail, no reason to pick up the review, unless you just want to check out some of the figures and pictures. But I do want to offer that as a resource it's been in addition to discussions with Dr. Andy Galpin, it's been a primary resource for the content of this episode. So let's talk about the four kinds of endurance and how to achieve those? I do believe that everybody should have some sort of endurance practice, regular endurance practice. It's clear that it's vital for the functioning of the body and the mind. And there are clear longevity benefits. There are a lot of reasons why that's true, but the main one is that if we have good energy utilization in our musculature and in our blood, in our vascular system and in our oxygenating system, our lungs, the so-called cardiovascular system, respiratory system and musculature. The body and brain function much better. There are so many papers now, so much data to support that. So I do believe everyone should either try to maintain the muscle that they have, provided they've already gone through puberty and development. And they should be engaged in regular endurance exercise. Now, for many people, they think endurance exercise. That means what? A hour long run or I got to get on the StairMaster or I have to treadmill for hours on end each week. And it turns out that's not the case. There are four kinds of endurance, and you can train specifically for any one of those, and you can vary your training. So let's talk about those four kinds of endurance. These are very interesting and they each have very different protocols that you use in order to build and maximize them. And now you'll understand what fuel sources they use in order to build that thing we call endurance. So first of all, we have muscular endurance. Muscular endurance is the ability for our muscles to perform work over time, and our failure to continue to be able to perform that work is going to be due to muscular fatigue, not to cardiovascular fatigue. So not because we're breathing too hard or we can't get enough blood to the muscles or because we quit mentally, but because the muscles themselves give out. Okay? One good example of this would be, if you had to pick up a stone in the yard and that stone is not extremely heavy for you, and you needed to do that anywhere from 50 to a 100 times, and you were picking it up and putting it down and picking it up and putting it down and picking up and putting it down. At some point, your muscles will fatigue. They will fail to endure. Muscular endurance is incredibly useful for a variety of physical pursuits. And we will talk about the mental pursuits that it supports as well. In terms of physical pursuits, the ability for a given muscle to perform repeated work is going to improve your golf swing. It's going to improve your tennis swing. It's going to improve your posture, your ability to dance, your ability to repeatedly engage in an activity that requires effort in a way that's very different from the kind of endurance that you will build simply by increasing your cardiovascular fitness, your ability to generate kind of easy repetition. So let's talk about muscular endurance and what it is? Muscular endurance is going to be something that you can perform for anywhere from 12 to 25, or even up to 100 repetitions. And that's actually how if you like you would train muscular endurance. And I'll give the specific protocol in a few moments. So a good example is push-ups, right? If you were to get on the floor and start doing push-ups, even if you're somebody who has to do knees down push-ups, and you're doing your push-ups, eventually you won't be able to do any more push-ups and that's not going to be because you couldn't get enough oxygen into your system, or your heart wasn't pumping enough blood. It's going to be because the muscles fail. That's why. So if you want to be able to do more push-ups or even more pull-ups. Muscular endurance is really what it's about. It's actually no coincidence that a lot of military bootcamp style training is not done with weights, it's done with things like push-ups, pull-ups, sit-ups and running. Because what they're really building is muscular endurance. The ability to perform work repeatedly over time for a given set of muscles and neurons. So what's a good protocol to build muscular endurance. Let's just give that to you now and explain some of the underlying science as it follows. So a really good muscular endurance training protocol according to the scientific literature would be, three to five sets of anywhere from 12 to 100 repetitions. That's a huge range. Now, 12 to 25 repetitions is going to be more reasonable for most people. And the rest periods are going to be anywhere from 30 to 180 seconds of rest. So anywhere from half a minute to three minutes of rest. So this might be five sets of push-ups, done getting your maximum push-ups although for some people that might be zero and you have to do it knees down. For some people it might be 10 push-ups, for some people might be 25, but you could go all the way up to 100. Rest anywhere from 30 to 180 seconds, and then do your next set for a total of three to five sets. So it doesn't actually sound like a ton of work. The other thing you could do is something like a plank. A plank position is actually a way to build muscular endurance, not strength. Okay? I'm sure it could be used to develop strength, but it's really about muscular endurance. So you would do three to five sets of planks. Those planks would probably even because you're not doing repetitions, it's an isometric hold as we say, as kind of static hold or a wall sit would be another example. And you would do that probably for a minute or two minutes, take some rest of anywhere from 30, 60, or 180 seconds, and then repeat. So things like pushing a sled, push-ups, isometric planks, even pull-ups, those will all work. And as with others forms of training, you would want to do this, until you approach failure or actually fail and where you're unable to perform another repetition that would mark the end of a set. The one critical feature of building muscular endurance is that it has no major east centric loading component. Now, I haven't talked much about eccentric and concentric loading. But concentric loading is when you are shortening the muscle typically or lifting a weight. And east centric movements are when you are lengthening a muscle typically or lowering a weight. So if you do a pull up and you get your chin over the bar or a chin up, that's the concentric portion of the effort, and then as you lower yourself, that's the eccentric portion. Eccentric portion of resistance training of any kind, whether or not it's for endurance or for strength is one of the major causes of soreness. Some people will be more susceptible to this, excuse me than others, but it does create more damage in muscle fibers. Muscular endurance and building muscular endurance should not include any movements that include major eccentric loads. So if you're going to do push-ups, it doesn't mean that you want to drop, you know, smash your chest into the floor. And by the way your chest should touch the ground on every push-up. That's a real push-up. Okay? It's not about breaking 90 with the elbows, it's about pushing down until your chest touch the floor and straightening out. That's a proper push-up. And a pull-up is where you pull up your chin above the bar. Neither of those should include a slow eccentric or lowering component. If you are using those to train muscular endurance the three to five sets of 12 to 25 and maybe even up to 100 repetitions with 3,280 seconds of rest in between. That means that jumping also is going to be a very poor tool for building muscular endurance, because jumping has a slowing down component as you land. So things like plyometrics or agility work where you're moving from side to side, and you're decelerating, you're slowing yourself down a lot, not going to be good for muscular endurance. Terrific for cardiovascular training and conditioning of other kinds and skill training and agility and all that. But if you want to build muscular endurance, you want to make your muscles able to do more work for longer. It's going to be this three to five sets of 12 to 100 reps, 30 to 180 seconds of mainly concentric movement. Okay? Not a slow lowering phase or a heavy lowering phase. So that might be kettlebell swings and things of that sort. Isometrics, as I mentioned, things like planks and wall sets will work. Now, what's interesting about this is that, it doesn't seem at all like what people normally think of as endurance. And yet it's been shown in nice, quality peer-reviewed studies, several of which are cited in the review I mentioned earlier, that muscular endurance can improve our ability to engage in long bouts of what we call long duration, low-intensity endurance work. So this can support long runs. It can support long swims. And it can build also... It can build postural strength and endurance simultaneously and that's mainly accomplished through isometrical. So things like planks are actually quite good for building endurance of the spinal erector muscles that provide posture of the abdominal muscles that are helpful for posture for being upright for the upper neck muscles and things of that sort. These days everyone seems to have texts neck. Everyone is basically staring at their toes all the time as a default towards their toes. So isometric holds can be very good for building muscular endurance. You can spot people including yourself, perhaps with poor muscular endurance in the postural muscles because anytime they stop moving, they have to lean against a wall or their hip will move to one side, or they're always leaned to one side. I am guilty of this too. Some of you have actually pointed out. I like to think out of concern that I often am rubbing my lower back. And indeed I have some asymmetries of my postural muscles some of which are probably genetic and some of which are probably just from excessive work or something of that sort that have my right shoulder set lower than my left and things of that sort. If I wanted to improve those, I could improve those by really focusing on symmetry and isometric. Symmetry meaning holding my hands at equivalent positions in planks and doing isometric holds for building muscular endurance of the postural muscles. But this can also be done with, as I mentioned, kettlebell swings for the lower back and legs and posterior chain. So there are a number of different exercises you could do this with, but it should be compound exercises mainly. It's rare for people to do this kind of muscular endurance work specifically for things like bicep curls or triceps. And there aren't many activities that really rely on isolation of those muscles and repeatedly, right? It's hard... I'm sure there are some out there, but it's kind of hard to imagine. So you can do this with isometrics, you can do this with more standard non-isometric type movements, but make sure there isn't a strong eccentric load. So now let's talk about the science briefly of why this works? Well, that takes us back to this issue of fuel utilization and what fails? So if we would say, okay, let's say you do a plank and you're planking for, you know, maybe you're able to plank for a minute or two minutes or three minutes. At some point you will fail. You're not going to fail because the heart gives out. You're not going to fail because you can't get enough oxygen because you can breathe while you're doing that. You're going to fail because of local muscular failure. Which means that as you do, if you choose to do this protocol of three to five sets, et cetera, et cetera, to build muscular endurance, mainly what you are going to be building is you're going to be building the ability of your mitochondria to use oxygen to generate energy locally. And that is something called mitochondrial respiration. Respiration because of the involvement of oxygen. And it's also going to be increasing the extent to which the neurons control the muscles and provide a stimulus for the muscles to contract. But this is independent of power and strength. Okay? So even though the low sets like three to five sets and the fact that you're doing repetitions and you're going to failure, even though it seems to resemble power and strength and hypertrophy type training, it is distinctly different. It's not going to generate strength, hypertrophy and power. It's going to mainly create this ability to endure to continually contract muscles or repeatedly contract muscles. Okay? Continually if you're using isometric holds, repeatedly, excuse me, if you're using repetition type exercise where there's a contraction and an extension the muscle essentially concentric and an eccentric portion. But remember that you want the eccentric portion to be light and relatively fast, not so fast that you injure yourself, but certainly not deliberately slowed down. It was recommended, I should say by Andy Galpin that you not use Olympic lifts for this, because once you get past eight or 12 or 25 repetitions, especially form on those Olympic lifts is key for not getting injured. And while some people can perform those sorts of of lifts likes snatches and deadlifts and cleans and jerks and overhead presses, probably not a great idea if the goal is to push the body to points of fatigue, because you do open yourself up to injury, unless you're very skilled at doing that, or you have a really good coach who can help you guide through those lifts. So that's one form of endurance which is muscular endurance. And it's mainly going to rely on neural energy. So nerves and muscle. And it's not going to rely quite so much on what's available in your blood, your heart or your lungs. So now let's talk about the other extreme of endurance which is long duration endurance. This is the type that people typically think about when they think about endurance. You're talking about a long run, a long swim, a long bike ride. Well, how long we'll anywhere from 12 minutes to several hours or maybe even an entire day, maybe eight or nine hours of hiking or running or biking. Some people are actually doing those kinds of really long events marathons, for instance. So anything longer than 12 minutes. And this type of work builds on fuel utilization in the muscles, it builds on the activity of neurons in the brain that are involved in what we call central pattern generators. We talked about this in a previous episode or several previous episodes. These are groups of neurons that allow our body to engage in regular rhythmic effort without having to think about the movement too much. So running and stepping or swimming if you already know how to swim, or peddling on a bike or walking upstairs and hiking, you're not thinking about right, left, right, left. It's all carried out by central pattern generators. This is going to be at less than a hundred percent of your maximum oxygen uptake, your VO2 max, I'll talk about what VO2 max is. But I just want to give a sense of what the protocol is, and the underlying science. How many sets? One. Long duration effort is one set of 12 minutes or longer. So you're not counting repetitions. I sure hope that if you're going out on a 30 minute run or even a 15 minute run, that you're not counting steps, that you're not counting pedal strokes, that you're not on the rower counting poles on the rower. I suppose you could, but I think that would be pretty dreadful. Seems like a poor utilization of cognitive brain space. You're getting into regular repeated effort and your ability to continue that effort is going to be dependent mainly on the efficiency of the movement on your ability to strike a balance between the movement itself, the generation of the muscular movements that are required, and fuel utilization across the different sources of nerve muscle, blood, heart and lungs. So let's ask the question. Why would you fail on a long run? Why would you quit? Well, as you set out on that long run, assuming you have some glycogen in your liver and in your muscles, you're going to use that energy first, even if it's very low intensity. I guess we're not talking about sprinting, we're talking about heading out the door or starting off on a marathon. You're starting to assuming you have some conditioning or even if you don't, you're going to burn carbohydrate. You're going to burn glucose in the bloodstream, you're going to burn carbohydrate as those muscles contract. Those what we call slow twitch muscles. They're contracting, they start burning up fuel to make ATP to continue to contract. Your mind is going to use more or less energy depending on how much willpower, how much of a fight you have to get into with yourself in order to generate the effort. I really want to underscore this. If you're somebody that's thinking, maybe I go for the run, maybe I don't go for the run. I'll do it at two o'clock. Okay, 2:05. No, I only want to go on the half hour or maybe on the main hour. And you're going through all that. Guess what? You're burning up useful energy that you could use either for the run, for example, or for something else. When we think about something hard, when we ruminate, when we perseverate on an idea or on a decision, we are burning neural energy and neural energy is glucose and epinephrin and all the things we talked about before. So willpower in part is the ability to devote resources to things and part of that is making decisions to just either do it or not do it. I'm not of the just do it mindset. I think there's a right time and a place to train. But I also think that it is not good. In other words, it utilizes excessive resources to churn over decisions excessively, and you probably burn as much cognitive energy deciding about whether or not to do a given training or not as you do in the actual training. Okay? So we'll talk more about how this long duration effort can relate to mental performance, but the long duration effort should be one set, 12 minutes or longer. It could go for 30 minutes or 60 minutes or an hour. We'll talk about programming later in the episode. This is going to be less than a hundred percent of your maximum oxygen uptake. Your heart rate is not going to be through the ceiling or maxed out. But it's all about efficiency of movement. That's what you're building. When you go out for a run that's 30 minutes, you are building the capacity to repeat that performance. The next time, while being more efficient actually burning less fuel. And that might seem a little bit counterintuitive, but every time you do that run, what you're doing is you're building up mitochondrial density. It's not so much about mitochondrial oxidation and respiration. You're building up mitochondrial density. You're actually increasing the amount of ATP that you can create for a given about of effort. You're becoming more efficient. Okay? You're burning less fuel overall doing the same thing. That's really what these long slow distance or long bouts of effort are really all about. Now, why do this long duration effort? Why would you want to do it? Why is it good for you? Well, it does something very important which is that it builds the capillary beds within muscles. So let's talk a little bit about vasculature. We haven't done this too much yet, but if you have seen the episode on supercharging performance. We talked about these AVAs arteriovenous anastomosis where blood moves from arteries directly into veins, but that's unusual, that only takes place in the so-called glabrous skin of the palms, the face and the bottoms of the feet. Typically, for most all other areas of the body what happens is, arteries bring blood to a given tissue like a muscle, and veins return that blood back to the heart. There are exceptions, but in general. And in between arteries and veins are these little tiny what are called capillary beds or microcapillaries. So these are tiny little avenues, like little tiny streams and estuaries between the bigger arteries and veins. Now, those are actually contained within muscle. And what's amazing is that you can increase the number of them. You can literally build new capillaries. You can create new little streams within your muscles and the type of long duration effort that I was talking about before to 12 minutes or more of steady effort is very useful for doing that, and is very useful for increasing the mitochondria, the energy producing elements of the cells, the actual muscle cells. And the reason is when blood arrives to muscles it has oxygen. The muscles are going to use some of that oxygen. And then some of the deoxygenated blood is going to be sent back to the heart and to the lungs. Now, the more capillaries that you build into those muscles, the more oxygen available to those muscles. I don't want to get too much into the physics of fluid flow. But basically it's the difference between taking a hose and sticking it into some dirt just directly like and turning on the faucet at a given rate, the spigot rather, or having a bunch of little hoses like a sprinkler system that go out and irrigate the whole yard. The irrigation is equivalent to this capillary bed system. And it's very good at using energy sources within blood. So the simple way to think about this is, when you go out for a run, let's say it's the first run you've done for a while, and you out for 12 or 15 minutes and somewhere right around 20 minutes you're like, that's it. I just can't continue. Well, when you come back the next time to do that run, you've built endurance largely because you've built these capillary beds. You've expanded these little streams in which blood can deliver oxygen to the muscles. And so it's going to feel relatively straightforward to either go a little bit quicker for the same duration, the same distance. Or to extend that run for another five to 10 minutes. So this long duration work, unlike muscular endurance like planks and everything that we were talking about before is really about building the capillary systems and the mitochondria, the energy utilization systems within the muscles themselves. And that's very important to understand. It's distinctly different than say building the neurons that fire the muscles. The neurons are already there, they're going to fire those muscles just fine. In fact, if your life depended on it, today you could probably run a marathon. You'd probably get injured, it would be very psychologically and physically painful. I don't recommend you do that unless you're trained for it. But if you were to train properly for it, if you were to do long duration bouts of effort once or twice a week or three times a week pretty soon it would become easy, because you're building these vascular micro beds or microvascular beds as they're called. Okay? So you're able to bring more energy to the muscles and they're able to utilize more energy. So that's long duration. So we've got muscular endurance and we've got long duration endurance. And then there are two kinds in between that in recent years have gotten a lot of attention and excitement, but most people are not distinguishing between these two kinds of endurance. And that's a shame because in failing to distinguish between the two kinds of what we call high-intensity training, sometimes called high intensity interval training. Most people, perhaps you, are not getting nearly as much physical and mental benefit out of high intensity training as you could. So I want to talk about the two kinds of high-intensity interval training, and what each of them does for your brain and body, and what sorts of adaptations they cause? Because in doing that, you can really start to build up specific energy systems in your brain and body in ways that are best serve you for your cognitive work. And for other sorts of things like strength and speed or hypertrophy or for running marathons for that matter. So there are two kinds of high intensity training for endurance. Sometimes called high-intensity interval training. One, is anaerobic, so-called an aerobic endurance, so no oxygen. And the other is aerobic endurance. Both of which qualify as HIIT, high intensity interval training. So let's talk about anaerobic endurance first. Anaerobic endurance from a protocol perspective is going to be three to 12 sets. Okay? And these records and I'll talk about what the repetitions are, are going to be performed at whatever speed allows you to complete the work in good, safe form. Okay? So it could be fast, it could be slow as the work continues, your repetitions may slow down, or it may speed up. Chances are it's going to slow down. So what does this work? What are the sets look like? Remember long slow distance is one set. Muscular endurance is three to five sets. High-intensity anaerobic endurance is going to be somewhere between three and 12 sets. And it's going to have a ratio of work to rest of anywhere from three to one to one to five. Okay? So what would a three to one ratio set look like? Well, it's going to be 30 seconds of hard pedaling on the bike, for instance, or running or on the rower. These are just examples. It could be in the pool, swimming. It could be any number of things or air squats, or weighted squats if you will provided you can manage that. 30 seconds on, 10 seconds off. That's a very brief rest. So three to one is just a good example would be 30 seconds on 10 seconds off. The opposite extreme on that ratio be one to five. So 20 seconds on a hundred seconds off. So you do the work for 20 seconds then you rest a hundred seconds. Now, what's the difference? What should you do three one ratio? So 30 seconds on 10 seconds off, or should you do one to five, 20 seconds on to 100 seconds off? Well, that will depend on whether or not the quality of the movement is important to you. So let's just take a look at the three to one ratio. So in the three to one ratio, if you're going to do 30 seconds of hard peddling on a bike followed by 10 seconds. So maybe one of these what they call assault bikes, and then you stop for 10 seconds and then repeat, chances are you will be able to do one, two, three, four, maybe even as many as 12 sets, if you're really in good condition that you'll be able to do all those because pedaling on the bike doesn't require a ton of skill. And if you do it incorrectly, if your elbow flares out a little bit or something, it's very unlikely that you'll get injured unless it's really extreme. Okay? But the same movement done for instance, with kettlebells. So 30 seconds on 10 seconds off. The first set will probably be in good form. The second one will be in pretty good form, but let's say you're getting to the fifth and sixth set and you're going 30 seconds on 10 seconds off chances are the quality of your repetitions will degrade significantly. And you increase the probability that you're going to get injured, or that you're going to damage in some way, or that you can't complete the movement or that some smaller muscles like your grip muscles might give out. Okay? So the quality of repetitions is going to drop considerably with the three to one approach. If you're just doing it for effort. And we'll talk about what this builds in your system in a moment, that's fine. But for most people, if quality of form is important, so maybe this is using weights, maybe you're doing squats. You're going to do 20 seconds on and 100 seconds of rest. Maybe it's even a barbell loaded squat, maybe you're doing kettlebells, maybe you've got some other resistance there that's allowing you to do this. What you'll find is that the longer rest, even though it's 20 seconds of intense effort, followed by a longer rest of about a hundred seconds will allow you to perform more quality repetitions safely over time. So what does building anaerobic endurance look like? And then I'll tell you what it's actually good for, in the true practical sense. What anaerobic endurance exercise generally looks like is that if you decide to do this for the first week, you might do this two or three times a week, maybe even just once a week, depending on the other things you're doing, we'll talk about programming at the end. And you would generate just three sets. So it might be three sets of 20 seconds of hard effort, followed by 100 seconds rest. Then you repeat 20 seconds of hard effort, 100 seconds rest, 20 seconds of effort, 100 seconds rest, and you might do that twice a week. And then each week you're adding one or two sets, okay? In doing that, you will build up what we call anaerobic endurance. What is anaerobic endurance? Well, let's ask why we fail? Anaerobic endurance is going to be taking your system into greater than 100% of your VO2 max. It's going to be taking your heart rate up very high and it's going to maximize your oxygen utilization systems. That is going to have effects that are going to lead to fatigue at some point in the workout. And that fatigue will trigger an adaptation. So let's ask what adaptation it's triggering. Well, it's triggering both mitochondrial respiration, the ability of your mitochondria to generate more energy by using more oxygen because you're bringing so... You're maxing out, literally you're getting above your VO2 max. You're hitting that threshold of how much oxygen you can use in your system? One of the adaptations will be that your mitochondria will shift such that they can use more oxygen. And you're going to also increase the capillary beds, but not as much as you're going to be able to increase the amount of neuron engagement of muscle. So normally when we start to hit fatigue, when we're exhausted, when we're breathing really hard because the systems of the body are linked and we there's a component to this as well, a kind of motivational component. After that third or fourth or sixth set of, you know, 20 seconds on a hundred seconds off, or if you're at the other extreme 30 seconds on, and 10 seconds off. There's going to be a component of you want to stop. And by pushing through and repeating another set safely, of course. What you're doing is you're training the neurons to be able to access more energy, literally, convert that into ATP and for the muscles therefore to access more energy and ATP. And the adaptation is in the mitochondria's ability to use oxygen, and this has tremendous carry over effects for other types of exercise. So while I know and appreciate that people are using high intensity interval training of this kind or similar in order to just like burn fat, you know, do their workouts, quote unquote. It's very useful for building a capacity to engage in short bouts of effort repeatedly to really lock in. I don't want to use the word focus because it's not strictly mental focus, but to be able to generate short bouts of very intense work this can be beneficial in competitive sports or team sports where there's a sprinting component, where the field opens up and you need to dribble the ball down the field, for instance and shoot on goal. Or where you're playing tennis, and it's a long rally. And then all of a sudden, somebody really starts, you know, putting you back on your heels and you have to really make the maximum amount of effort to run to the net and to get the ball across in that. Things of that sort. Okay? There are a variety of places where there's carry over from this type of training, but it does support endurance. It's about muscle endurance. It's about these muscles ability to generate a lot of force in the short-term, but repeatedly. Okay? So that's the way to conceptualize this. And it is different than maximum power. Even though it feels like maximum effort, it is not the same as building power and speed into muscles. Those are distinctly different protocols. So the key elements again are that you're bringing your breathing and your oxygen utilization way up above your max. It's not quite hitting failure, but you're really pushing the system to the point where you are not ready to do another set and yet you begin another set. You're not necessarily psychologically ready. I'll talk more about some of the adaptations that this causes in terms of stroke volume in a few minutes when we talk about how it is that work of this sort can increase our heart's ability to deliver blood and oxygen to our lungs and other tissues. I'm going to get very specific about how to breathe during these different types of protocols and what's happening at the level of the heart? But I want to make sure I touch on the fourth protocol which is high intensity aerobic conditioning. So HIIT has these two forms, anaerobic and aerobic. And you just heard about anaerobic. High-intensity aerobic conditioning also involves about three to 12 sets. Starting off of course, with fewer sets as you're getting into this training and then extending into more sets as one parameter you could expand. Has again the same ratio of three to one. So 30 seconds on 10 seconds off, or one to five, 20 seconds on 100 seconds off, or a very powerful tool for building up aerobic conditioning is a one-to-one ratio. A one-to-one ratio is powerful for building on average. Most of the energy systems involving, remember we had these nerve muscle blood, heart and lungs. A one-to-one ratio might be you run a mile. And however long that takes, let's say it takes you six minutes or seven minutes, then you rest for an equivalent amount of time. Then you repeat. And then you rest for an equivalent amount of time. So you might run first mile is let's say seven minutes. Then you rest for seven minutes. Then you run a mile again, and it might take eight minutes and you rest for eight minutes. And you continue that for a total of four miles of work. Four miles of running work, I should say. Or seven miles of work. You can build this up. Many people find that using this type of training allows them to do things like go run half marathons and marathons even though prior to the race date, they've never actually run a half marathon or marathon. Now, that might seem incredible. It's like how could it be that running a mile on, and then resting for running a mile and then resting for an equivalent amount of time, running a mile, resting for equivalent amount time for seven miles allows you to run continuously for 13 miles or for 26 miles. Well, I'm not discouraging people from ever doing the long duration endurance. I think that is very important. But it's because it builds up so many of these energy utilization systems. It really teaches you to engage, excuse me, the nerve to muscle firing. It improves ATP and mitochondrial function in muscle. It allows the blood to deliver more oxygen to the muscle and to your brain. And I'll explain how that is. And it allows your heart to deliver more oxygen overall. And it builds a tremendous lung capacity. And we will talk about exactly how to breathe and how to build lung capacity. Both for sake of warming up and for performance. So what would this look like? And when should you do this? Well, it's really a question for these workouts of asking how much work can one do in eight to 12 minutes, right? And then rest, and then repeat. How much work can you do for eight to 12 minutes then rest and then repeat? And how many times should you do this? Well, this is the sort of thing it's pretty intense. And so you would probably only want to do this two, maybe three times a week if you're not doing many other things. I will talk about how this program can be moved in with other forms of training. But I'll just give you a little hint now. It's very clear and it's described in the review article are referred to and we will link another article as well. That concurrent training, doing strength training and the endurance training of any of the four kinds that I'm describing today can be done. You can program those in the same week. But you want to get four and ideally six or even better 24 hours between these workouts. Because it is very hard, for instance, to do a one-to-one mile repeats like run a mile rest for equivalent time, run a mile rest for equivalent time to do that two or three times a week, and also do weight training before or do a long run afterwards. That would quickly lead to break down for most people, unless you have very, very good energy utilization systems. You're really kind of advanced or elite athlete, and or dare I say you're using tools to enhance your performance at the level of blood or hormones. And I'm actually going to talk about those at the end and why they work? So we have four kinds of endurance. Muscular endurance. We have long-duration endurance. We have high intensity interval training of two kinds, anaerobic and aerobic. And this last type, the aerobic one works best. It seems if you kind of do this one-to-one ratio. So how would you use these and what are they actually doing? Let's talk about the heart and the lungs and oxygen, because that's something that we can all benefit from understanding. And it will become very clear in that discussion why this type of training is very useful even for non-athletes in order to improve oxygenation and energy utilization of the brain and the heart. The brain and the heart are probably the two most important systems that you need to take care of in your life. Yes, your musculature needs to be maintained. If you want to build it, that's up to you. But you should try and maintain your musculature, but maintaining or enhancing a brain function and cardiovascular function. It's absolutely clear are key for health and longevity in the short and long-term. And the sorts of training I talked about today has been shown again and again and again to be very useful for enhancing the strength of the mind. Yes, I'll talk about that. As well as the health of the brain and the body. So let's talk about the sorts of adaptations that are happening in your brain and body that are so beneficial in these different forms of training. If you are breathing hard and your heart is beating hard. So this would be certainly in the high intensity anaerobic and aerobic conditioning. 'Cause you're getting up near your VO2 max in high intensity aerobic conditioning, and you're exceeding your VO2 max in high intensity anaerobic conditioning. What's going to happen is as of course, your heart beats faster, your blood is going to be circulating faster in principle. Oxygen utilization in muscles is going to go up and over time, not long, very quickly what will happen when those capillary beds start to expand? We talked about that. But in addition, because of the amount of blood that's being returned to the heart, when you engage in these really intense bouts of effort repeatedly, the amount of blood being returned to the heart actually causes an east centric loading of one of the muscular walls of the heart. So your heart is muscle. It's cardiac muscle. We have skeletal muscle attached to our bones and we have cardiac muscle, which is our heart. When more blood is being returned to the heart because of the additional work that your muscles and nerves are doing, it actually has the effect of creating an east centric loading, a kind of pushing of the wall, the left wall. I realize I'm not using the strict anatomy here, but I don't want to get into all the features of the structural features of the heart. But the left ventricle essentially getting slammed back and then having to push back in a kind of east centric loading of the cardiac muscle and the muscle thickens, but not because the heart thickens overall, it's actually a strengthening of the cardiac muscle in a way that increases what we call stroke volume. Meaning as more blood is returned to the heart. There's an adaptation where the heart muscle actually gets stronger and therefore can pump more blood per stroke per beat. And as it does that, it delivers because blood contains glucose and oxygen and other things. It delivers more fuel to your muscles which allows you to do yet more work per unit time. Okay? So when we hear that, oh, you know, so-and-so has a or maybe you have a nice low heart rate that maybe you're one of these really extreme folks like 30 or 40 beats per minute, although most people are sitting at 50, 60, 70, 80, that's your resting heart rate. If you exercise regularly and you do long duration aerobic work, your heart rate will start to go down, your resting heart rate. It will increase the stroke volume of your heart. If you do this high intensity type training where your heart is beating very hard. So maybe the one-to-one ratio mile run repeats that I described a minute ago. Let's say you do that twice a week for three or four. And I said, it could go all the way up to 12 rep sets, which is a lot. I don't recommend people start there. Pretty soon, the stroke volume of your heart will really increase. And as a consequence, you can deliver more fuel to your muscles and to your brain, and you will notice that you can do more work meaning you can do the same work you were doing a few days or weeks ago with relative ease. Your cognitive functioning will improve. This has been shown again and again, because there's an increase in vasculature. Literally, capillary beds within the brain, the hippocampus areas that support memory, but also areas of the brain that support respiration, that support focus, that support effort. This isn't often discussed, but the ability to deliver more blood and therefore more glucose, remember neurons run on glucose and oxygen to the brain is a big feature of why exercise of the kind of describing helps with brain function. Now, weight training does have some positive effects on brain function also. When I say weight training, I'm really... I should be more specific. I really am referring to strength and hypertrophy training. Strength and hypertrophy training especially if it's of the sort where you get into the burn as we talked about last episode and you start generating lactate as a hormonal signal that can benefit your brain, et cetera. It can have positive effects on the brain. And frankly, there haven't been as many studies of resistance training strength and hypertrophy training on brain function, mainly because most of those experiments are done in mice or primates, non-human primates, I should say. And it's hard to get mice to do resistance training. Okay? It's hard to get humans to do resistance training. It's definitely hard to get mice to do resistance training. There are ways to do it, but it's hard to get them to do say, you know, three sets of eight on the deadlift and then do some curls and then do some chin-ups and this kind of thing. Okay? It's pretty easy to get a mouse to run on a treadmill and you can set the tension on that treadmill to make it so that it's easier or harder for the mouse to turn that wheel. So that's one of the reasons. However, it's very clear and you should now understand intuitively why the kind of standard strength and hypertrophy type workouts are not going to activate the blood oxygenation and the stroke volume increases for the heart that the sorts of training I'm talking about today will. It just doesn't have the same positive effects. Now, that isn't to say that if you just weight train that you'll be dumb or that you'll lose your memory over time, you might, but it is to say that endurance work in particular the high intensity and long duration work that I've talked about today. The two high intensity protocols and the long duration work has been shown again and again and again, to have positive effects on brain function. Not through the addition of new neurons, sorry to break it to you, but that's not a major event in the exercised or non-exercised human brain, for reasons we can talk about in a future episode. But it still has many positive effects through the delivery of things like IGF-1, but also just through plain oxygenation of the brain and the way it promotes the development of microvasculature to develop, to excuse me, to deliver new neurons more nutrients. If neurons don't get oxygen and glucose, they do die. Unless there's another fuel source like ketones which can replace the glucose. If you don't give oxygen to neurons, if you don't deliver enough to them, you get what's called ischemia, you get little micro strokes. So the type of exercise I'm talking about today in generating intense heart rate increases provided that safe for you to do. Breathing hard, that's going to deliver oxygen in blood, increase stroke volume of the heart and is going to improve brain function has been supported by many, many quality peer-reviewed studies. So that's one form of positive adaptation. I also talked about just sort of performance adaptations. How doing high intensity aerobic conditioning of the mile repeats type training can actually improve your ability to do long bouts of intense work. It also seems like it dovetails or is compatible with resistance training that's aimed towards strength and hypertrophy. Now, in full disclosure the data seemed to indicate that if people just weight train or train for strength, so three reps, rest five minutes, three reps of heavyweights, et cetera. Yeah, you'll get much stronger than you would if you're doing things like five repetitions up to 12, or 12 to 25 reps and you're going out for long jogs. There's always going to be a compromise in adaptations, unfortunately It does seem like you can do concurrent training as I mentioned before, if you allow anywhere from four to six or ideally 24 hours between workouts. As I mentioned in the previous episode, if you want to know if you are recovered from a workout? A great way to do that is to apply the carbon dioxide tolerance test, which is four breaths in and out, inhale, exhale, inhale exhale, inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale, then a big inhale and then a slow controlled exhale. If that slow controlled exhale is 60 seconds or longer, it means that your parasympathetic, your calming nervous system is under your control. And it's likely, I should say likely that systemically your whole nervous system has recovered from whatever it is that you've been doing and experiencing in life including work in relationships. If not, you might want to take a rest day, dare I say. Or Costello's on is what? He's 10 now. I think he's on his 12,000 thrust day. Most people need I should say, one to two full rest days per week. I know there are people going to say that's ridiculous and okay, maybe you have amazing recovery abilities, also depends on training intensity. Many people benefit from having one or two full rest days per week. At least one, some people don't need to. But if you are not able to extend that exhale on the carbon dioxide tolerance test past 60 seconds or so, 45 seconds, 60 seconds chances are, your so-called sympathetic nervous system, your stress system is chronically elevated and you're not really putting the brake on that system enough. And that's a subconscious thing. There are ways that you can accelerate recovery, but I would encourage you to listen to the previous episode. It's time-stamped for how to assess recovery. So how often to program these things will depend on the other things you're doing. I think it's perfectly reasonable to do this type of training with other types of training. And I'll talk about a variety of combinations of those toward the end of the episode. I do want to talk about how to deliver more energy and oxygen. These are tools that are extremely useful, I believe and that are grounded in physiology. That three things I'd like to talk about, are how to breathe? What to do immediately after training and hydration? And I promise I will get back into programming and sort of protocols, but these are vitally important to your ability to perform endurance work in particular. And they are grounded in how neurons and blood and oxygen and your heart work together. So let's first talk about breathing or respiration. We breathe a couple of different ways, but let's just remind ourselves why we breathe? We breathe to bring oxygen into our system, and we breathe to get rid of carbon dioxide. And we need both oxygen and carbon dioxide in order to utilize fuel and for our brain and body to work. It's not the oxygen is good and carbon oxide is bad. They have to be present in the appropriate ratios. So one thing that is very clear is our ability to deliver oxygen to working muscles enter our brain is going to be important for our ability to generate muscular effort especially of a kind of what I was talking about today, but also weight training and other forms of skill-based effort, et cetera. And our ability to think. If you're holding your breath for too long, if you're breathing too much, if you're what they call over-breathing or under breathing, if you're shallow breathing, if you're mouth breathing, these are all things that can really impede mental and physical performance. So let's make it really simple and then I promise to do a future episode all about recipes. There are two main sources of air for your body and it's air coming in through your nose and air coming in through your mouth. In general nasal breathing is better. It scrubs the air of bacteria and viruses. You have a microbiome in your nose that benefits. There are a number of reasons, it's also just a more efficient system believe it or not, even though it feels like you can gulp more air with your mouth. Getting good at nasal breathing is useful. A gear - System of the type that Brian McKenzie and colleagues have developed, I think is a good way to conceptualize this. If you're doing long duration work, try and do it all nasal breathing. If you have deviated septum, it's probably cause you don't nasal breathe enough. Mouth breathing is something that many people suffer from. You are more prone to infections. It's not as efficient, et cetera. There is a place for mouth breathing. However, it's usually, if you need to do a strong exhale, oftentimes you can discard more volume through the mouth, unless you're very trained at nasal breathing. So if you're doing high intensity training, a good way to conceptualize this is to exhale on the max effort, and then to inhale on the less intense part. So that might be as you're generating the movement, you know, you're in the concentric part of the movement you exhale, right? Just like on a bat swing or something like that, or fighters and martial artists do this differently depending on how they were trained and their different purposes, but they kind of like huh or ssh, they kind of exhaling during the effort and then inhaling on the portion of the repetition that is not the highest effort portion. Usually that's the eccentric phase of anything involving or rowing and things of that sort. So nasal breathing is great, but as you increase the intensity of your endurance work, you will need to incorporate the mouth. So a gear system would look something like first gear would be just nasal breathing or second gear would also be just nasal breathing. But with more effort, third gear again, power speed endurance has a lot more about this. You can go to their website. I think it's a very intelligent way to conceptualize this. As you go into more max effort, then you're going to third and fourth and fifth gear. And at some point you're not thinking about nose or mouth. You're just trying to hang on for dear life and complete the work safely. And that means breathe through whatever orifice works for you. So that's one aspect, nose versus mouth. The other aspect is whether or not you're using your ribs, the intercostal muscles are these muscles that the Bruce Lee had these remarkable intercostal muscles that allow you to lift the rib cage or the diaphragm which is a skeletal muscle that sits below the lungs. Just to remind you, when you inhale, the diaphragm moves down, when you exhale, the diaphragm moves up. Okay? Here's something that most people don't do and would benefit tremendously from. And I can say this because Andy Galpin's lab has done work on this exploring how warming up the intercostals and the nerve to diaphragm pathways before any kind of endurance work or in the first few minutes of endurance work can allow you to breathe more deeply and to deliver more oxygen to the blood, [burps] excuse me, and to the muscles and to be able to do more work more efficiently. So what that involves is sometimes sitting, sometimes standing and just really concentrating on two things. We always hear about how we should diaphragmatic breathe. And that means that our belly moves out when we inhale. So [inhales deeply] our stomach expands, but also expanding the intercostals which means actually raising the ribs, chest breathing. We're all told that in yoga class don't breathe with your chest this, [inhales deeply]. But actually that is warming up the intercostal muscles. So this is also a great way to generate adrenaline if you do it a little bit intensely. So let's say you're feeling unmotivated to train, I don't particularly like doing endurance training until I'm actually doing it. So I use and benefit from having a practice where I'll just sit there and for about three minutes I'll just breathe very deeply trying to raise my chest as much as I can for maybe a minute, and then contracting my diaphragm and expanding my stomach outward when I inhale. By the end of that you're actually delivering more oxygen to your system. My lab has looked at this in a totally different context. Andy's lab has looked at it in the context of physical performance. So warming up the breathing muscles should make sense, given that you now know that muscles and neurons need glucose and they need oxygen in order to function. And so that's a great warmup. You can also do this while walking or while getting on the bike and starting to peddle, really starting to think about warming up the breathing system. And then you can decide if you want to do pure nasal or a combination of nasal and mouth breathing and so on. So that's something that we don't often hear about. The other one. The other tool, rather that I talked about in a previous episode, I'll just mention again, is some people when they do endurance type work they get a stitch in their side. They feel like they've got a side cramp. Very rarely is it actually a skeletal muscular cramp, it's oftentimes it's a referenced pain of the phrenic nerve that innervates the liver. So the phrenic nerve is responsible for the movement of the diaphragm. It is a very important system, but it has a number of what we call collateral. So it branches to other organs. Runs over other organs. Sometimes when we're breathing shallow and we are in physical motion and we're engaging in physical effort, we'll feel that side stitch. And we think, oh, I've got a cramp or maybe I'm dehydrated or maybe I need to run with my hands over my head, excuse me. Typically, you can relieve that side cramp, which isn't a cramp at all. That side stitch by doing the double inhale, exhale, really breathing deeply. [inhales deeply] And then sneaking a little bit more air in. That's a double kind of firing or what we call volume of action potential sent from the phrenic nerve to the diaphragm, which will also activate that collateral, that branch literally of the nerve that innervates the liver. And then when you exhale, you offload a bunch of carbon dioxide, but if you repeat that a few times often, in fact, for me every time but often what'll happen is that side stitch will just naturally disappear. Just means you're not breathing properly. You're the phrenic nerve is firing in a way that's kind of aggravating that referenced pain. There's nothing kind of voodoo or mysterious about this. It just has to do with the way that the different nerves travel in the body. So as you set out on your run or maybe you're going to do some muscular endurance work or high intensity work, warming up the intercostals, warming up the diaphragm is good. And there are exercises and there is work that you can do to strengthen the intercostals and to strengthen the diaphragm during bouts of this kind of effort. And I would say that one of the ways that you can do that best is by really focusing on getting the maximum diaphragmatic expansion and chest lifting. What we're all told now not to do, you know, don't chest breathe, belly breathe. The intercostals are there for a reason and they are perfectly good at filling your lungs. And they work best when they collaborate with your diaphragm. But when you are starting to fatigue to start to really inhale deeply and try and really expand those to deliver more oxygen to your system. While we're talking about delivering more oxygen to your system, I want to share with you a useful tool that will now make total sense mechanistically why it works, which is oftentimes when we are on a long run or in long duration bouts of effort. We will hit the so-called wall, right? We will bonk. I think they used to call it, do they still call it that Costello? He's asleep. We bonk. Where we just we think no, we can't continue. It's a curious thing as to whether or not that's neural or whether or not it's fuel-based, there's certainly going to be a psychological or motivational component. But one way that you can reveal this kind of extra gear, the capacity to push on is by understanding the way that different muscle fibers use energy differently. Remember the fast-twitch phosphocreatine system and the slow twitch system that relies mainly on lipids and glucose. Okay, well, even if you don't remember all that, if you've been running steadily for a long time and you're starting to fatigue and you feel like it's time to quit. You may have not tapped into an alternative fuel source. One thing that you can do is you can actually increase your speed. This is also true of work where you're doing repetitions with kettlebells or something. You can start to increase your speed. So run faster, pedal faster, row faster, swim faster not all out sprint. But in doing that, you're shifting the the muscles and the nerves over towards utilizing a separate fuel source or a distinct fuel source. Maybe the phosphocreatine system if it's a quick about of intense acceleration, or maybe it's a combination of lipids and carbohydrates in your system that weren't available to you prior. Now, of course, if you completely deplete your liver glycogen, you completely deplete everything, you're only going to be running on stored fuel and fats and eventually you'll start metabolizing protein, muscles themselves. But this is a kind of a unique way to realize that, oh, you weren't out of energy at all, you're just over-relying on one fuel source. And this is the reason why, especially elite athletes are starting to both rely on carbohydrates. So they're doing the whole carb depletion then carb loading thing. They're loading up their liver and their muscles with plenty of glycogen by eating pastas and rice and stuff before races. But they are also ingesting ketones during races, during long bouts of effort, because ketones can be a quick form of energy. There's no reason why you can't use ketones if they are taking exogenous ketones and carbohydrate. And in combination, remember the body is accustomed to using multiple fuel sources, fatty acids, carbohydrates all these things. It's only in the, you know, of internet age that we think in terms of, oh, well you're either keto or you're burning sugar, or you're fat adapted or key or fat fasting or fast fasting or fat fatting. Costello woke up when I said fat fatting. I'm not talking about you Costello. So the point is that your body is used to using multiple fuel sources. So if you're kind of hitting that wall, sometimes accelerating can actually allow you to tap into a new fuel source or combination of fuel sources just based on the way that muscles use fuel. So that's another tool. The other thing that's really important to think about in terms of endurance type work is hydration. And I think hydration is important for all forms of physical work and exercise not just endurance. The deal with hydration is that we've been taught about hydration all wrong. But let's remember what neurons work on? What do they use in order to fire? Well, they certainly need water, right? We need water in our system, I should say. But remember they use electrolytes, sodium and potassium to generate those action potentials to actually get neurons to contract, to be able, excuse me, muscles to contract and for our brain to function and to be able to think. Typically, we're going to lose anywhere from one to five pounds of water per hour of exercise. And that's going to vary tremendously, it's going to vary on weather, it's going to vary on intensity, probably more like five pounds, if it's hot day and you're exercising very intensely. So about one to five pounds per hour. Now, you know how much you weigh. So if you think about your weight in pounds, once you lose about one to 4% of your body weight in water, you're going to experience about a 20 to 30% reduction in work capacity. In your ability to generate effort of any kind, strength, endurance, et cetera. You are also going to experience a significant drop in your ability to think and perform mental operations. So hydration is key. Now, many people have been told, well, if you urinate and your urine is clear, well, then you're hydrated enough. Sometimes that's true. Sometimes that's not true. Also and this isn't a topic I enjoyed discussing, but a urine is a biological phenomenon. It's actually filtered blood every once in a while and if there's a kid and it's a family friend, I'll say, "Did you know that your pee "is actually filtered blood?" And they usually kind of go wide-eyed. But then they go, "Oh, that's kind of cool." Like kids have this natural curiosity about blood and pee and stuff. That's not contaminated by our preconceived notions of those things being gross, because you're in being filtered blood can give you some indication as to whether or not you're hydrated enough or not. And in order to really assess that, it's not going to be sufficient to urinate into another volume of water and assess whether or not your urine is very dark or very light. It actually requires urinating into a small volume and saying, well, is it darker or lighter than before? It's not something you really want to do most places. The etiquette of most gyms and environments is not suitable for that. But one of the things that you can just do is you configure, well, I'm going to lose one to five pounds of water per hour. You can show up to exercise reasonably hydrated with electrolytes. So potassium, sodium and magnesium are really key. Yes, it's true, you can die from drinking too much water in particular because it forces you, if you drink too much water, you excrete too many electrolytes and your brain will shut off. You'll actually your heart will stop functioning properly. So you don't want to over consume to the extreme either, but there are a number of equations that go into figuring out how much water you need based on how intense your training, et cetera, body size, et cetera. Just remember you burn, you lose, excuse me about one to five pounds of water per hour, depending on how hot it is, and how intensely you're exercising. Once your body weight drops by one to 4%. So you can just figure, well, if you lose five pounds per hour, you exercise for two hours. Let's say you're about 200 pounds, that's about 10%. Okay? Well, you want to replace that before you very quickly or not. You want to replace that all along before you start experiencing this massive 20 to 30% reduction in work capacity of muscles and the brain. A simple formula. What I call it, the Galpin equation. Hereafter, referred to as the Galpin equation is a formula that gets you close to the exact amount that you would want that Dr. Andy Galpin came up with, which is your body weight in pounds divided by the number 30. And that is how many ounces you should drink for every 15 minutes of exercise. So once again, the Galpin equation. Your body weight in pounds divided by 30. That's the amount of fluid to drink in ounces, right? Every 15 minutes of exercise. Now, if you are sweating a lot, you may need more. Okay? If you're already very well hydrated, you may need less, but that's a good rule of thumb to begin and to start to understand the relationship between hydration and performance. There is a phenomenon in which gastric emptying, the ability to move stuff out of your gut, including water and electrolytes out of your gut and into the bloodstream and for delivery to the tissues of your body for effort is hindered when you get above 70% of your VO2 max. In other words when you're doing high intensity training sometimes people experience that ingesting water during intense training is difficult. It is something that can be actually trained up. It's a matter of learning to kind of relax your abdominal muscles. And there's some other aspects of adaptation that will allow you to drink during higher intensity work. As Galpin says, don't try and ingest fluids when you're working out or competing at higher than 70% of VO2 max if you've never done it before. You want to train up this capacity. People can learn how to consume fluids during a race or consume fluids during bouts of exercise that are very intense. And a lot of people don't want to do that, 'cause they don't want to have to stop to urinate, et cetera. But given the crucial role of hydration for muscular performance and for brain performance, it seems that if you're going to be doing a lot of high intensity interval training of the various concepts talked about today or high intensity training of any kind that hydration is key and learning or in other words, getting your system to adapt to ingesting fluids in the middle of these workouts is something that seems beneficial. At least to me, in terms of the trade off between being dehydrated and the somewhat discomfort of maybe drinking some fluids. So you sip small amounts of fluid initially and then you're able to take bigger and bigger gulps as time goes on. And pretty soon you're able to drink mid-set or be, excuse me, not mid-set. Please don't do that between sets and your workout or while you're still breathing hard after a mile repeat or something of that sort without much disruption or any at all to your performance. Last episode we talked about how to assess recovery and things that you might want to do to improve recovery, how exposure to ice baths and cold showers can reduce inflammation which can be great for recovery, but can inhibit some of the adaptations for strength and hypertrophy. Because inflammation isn't good or bad. Inflammation isn't like a nice person or a mean person. It's both. It's a great thing for stimulating adaptations, but you don't want it around too long. And so we suggested that you not do ice baths within probably six hours of any training where the goal was hypertrophy or strength training. There is some evidence that getting yourself into an ice bath or cold shower after endurance training can actually improve the mitochondrial aspects of endurance exercise that you can get improvements in mitochondrial density, and you can get improvements in mitochondrial respiration by doing that afterwards and that it can facilitate recovery. That's still a bit of a controversial area. I do think that what I mentioned earlier that waiting at least six hours and probably more like 24 hours between workouts is a good idea. That getting at least one full day of rest each week, for some people that'll be two. I have to say I'm one of these people that after two days of absolutely no exercise, I do perform better consistently across all aspects of physical performance and mentally I feel better as well even though I load to take those days off unless I'm really exhausted it does seem to help my training. Some people can train seven days a week and they're fine. I think it just is there's a lot of individual variation. You want to work on sleep and maximizing sleep for recovery nutrition, of course, as well. I talked about sleep in the first four episodes of the podcast. If you have trouble with sleep definitely check out those episodes. It's very clear and a number of sports teams even some folks that I work with, and Andy Galpin and others are starting to incorporate a what's called a parasympathetic down-regulation after training of any kind as a way to accelerate recovery and enable you to do more work. In other words, get back to work out sooner. What is parasympathetic downregulation? It means finishing your training and instead of just hopping on the phone or hopping into your car and heading off to take five minutes minimum, maybe ideally more like 10 or 20, but for sake of time five minutes minimum and doing just some slow pure nasal long exhale breathing or lying down and just kind of zoning out. That it seems can accelerate recovery and allow you to get back into other types of work, mental work or physical work more quickly which makes total sense because remember your nervous system and recovery and work is a local phenomenon which muscles were you using. You know, were you using your glutes, your hams and your back or were using your shoulders, et cetera. But it's also a systemic thing. It's also about those neurons in the locus coeruleus that are releasing epinephrine and you want to quiet all that down after training. You want to really just zone out. Think Costello, channel your inner Costello, and just mellow out for five to 20 minutes and then move into the rest of your day. Five minutes should be manageable. Even if it's just sitting in the car with your eyes closed doing that downregulation breathing. I think you'll see big benefits in terms of allowing yourself to come back sooner, do more work over time and just perform and feel better generally, as well as be able to think about other things besides the just how much the previous workout kind of beat you up. A couple more things I think are going to be useful. And I do want to just pack these in, 'cause we are closing out the month on physical performance. And that's about programming and about pacing and the kind of mental aspects of endurance. So let's start with pacing and mental aspects of endurance. I learned from a friend and colleague here at the podcast that... Who's very active in triathlon and marathon and other... Knows a lot about that whole world and the competitive landscape there, that pacing and literally physical pacers have a laser on the ground or visualizing or having a pace car or a pace runner in front is actually not allowed in many competitions. And if those are present doesn't allow the race times to qualify as legitimate record holding times. And that's very interesting to me because what we know is that the visual system has this capacity to switch back and forth between what we call panoramic vision where we're not really focused on anything. Things are just flowing past us or our eyes are just kind of zoned out. So I can do this right now and you won't be able to tell but I'm looking at the corners of the room. I see Costello down there on the floor. I see my podcast team here and I can also see the microphone. I can see myself in this environment. That's panoramic vision. Whereas if I draw my eyes to one location like right there in the center of the camera, it's what's called a vergence eye movement. So I'm contracting my visual window. The contraction of the visual window when that's done, is the same thing that would happen if I was tracking say a pace car or a pace runner or a laser on the ground. The mere bringing our eyes together to what we call a vergence point has the impact of triggering the activation of neural circuits in the thalamus. Things like zona incerta, if you really want to know what their names are, of these brain areas. As well as in the brainstem that activate the so-called alertness system, things like locus coeruleus, whereas panoramic vision tends to bring us into states of relaxation. You can actually leverage us during your runs. Let's say you're out for a long run or you're swimming or you're cycling. This is probably easiest to imagine out of the water before I do in the water as well. If you focus your attention on a landmark that you're going to run to, you'll find that it's much easier than if you don't actually have a set milestone or landmark that you're going to run to. However, if you were to continue that repeatedly just going milestone after milestone, after milestone, you would feel more mentally fatigued and you would actually be able to degenerate less work overall. One thing that can be useful is focusing on a milestone, running to that milestone or biking whatever it is the activity happens to be, and then dilating your field of view to relax the system and then continuing again. So it's this kind of active contraction or of the visual window and then dilation of the visual window. Contraction of the visual window allows you to generate more effort but there's a cost to doing that, because neurons consume energy. And now you know how they do that. Whereas dilation allows you to essentially be more efficient, right? Now, pacing is not allowed or having a pacer, a visual pacer because it does allow you to access systems in the brain and body that allow you to create more energy, more effort. And so I find it interesting that I think in a kind of subconscious genius the race officials and the governing bodies of these races have said, okay, sure, having a pacer there or someone in front, you can draft off of them, there's actually a kind of a aerodynamic effect of having someone in front of you that makes it easier to run in the wake of their airstream. So to speak. Same as true in cycling. This is why the cycling teams are so good at maneuvering and packs. In very specific ways, you can go faster with less effort if you're drafting as it's called behind somebody. But as well where you place your vision will allow you to generate more effort. And so it's interesting that they've taken out this kind of, if you will, performance enhancing tool. I imagine and I have to imagine it's the appropriate word here. That good runners, good cyclists have the ability to create a kind of pacer in their minds eye. I have to imagine that they're not just completely allowing their attention to drift, although they do that when they want to be in highly efficient mode generating effort without having to tax their mental capacity. And remember mental capacity is neural energy and consumes glucose energy that they could devote to the functioning of their body. But that when needed that they can focus their energy in, and actually kind of chase a mental pacer or pick milestone. So this is a mental game that you can play as well. It's a little bit hard to do in the context of weightlifting in the gym. It's more of a moving through space kind of thing, but some people do this by counting reps, et cetera. I think it's especially suitable for endurance type of exercise, especially done outside. One of the reasons I hate running on a treadmill is it just feels like it's never ending. And I've never tried one of these Peloton things. I try and avoid looking at screens as much as I possibly can. But if you try this next time you're out for a run or a swim. What you'll find is that you have a capacity to engage a system of higher energy output when you focus your eyes on a particular location, but you want to use that judiciously because your goal of course, is to become efficient at moving through space over time and not taxing your brain and body to the point where you arrive at the end of that, unless it's race day just completely tapped out. So that's a kind of interesting aspect of running. If you're a fan of running, which I am, and you get the chance to look at any of the documentaries or docu-drama has made about, [clears throat] excuse me, about Steve Prefontaine. It was clear that he was mostly in a battle with himself, but that he was also a highly competitive individual. And you'll see this in some of his races. I do encourage you to look some of those up on YouTube or see the docudramas. They're quite good. Where he ran the... Essentially was 12 laps on a track. It's essentially the five. It is the 5,000 meter race where essentially three miles. And he essentially tried to sprint the whole thing which is ridiculous. Actually knowing what you know today you'll realize that Steve Prefontaine basically was pulling from strength, speed, power, muscular, endurance, long duration effort, high intensity, aerobic, anaerobic as he sort of tried to maximize every fuel system. And you'll see that in the races that he runs, but that when runners are nearing the final laps, the so-called bell lap of a race, they'll often look to one another to see where somebody is obviously to assess their progress and how close somebody is? But when somebody gets past, oftentimes you'll see someone access this mysterious kick, this ability to tap into some additional gear that allows them to run forward or faster when they themselves actually thought that they were maxed out. So someone could be running for the finish line. They're convinced they're going to win. They're going max effort or at least they perceive max effort. Someone passes them. And all of a sudden max effort has changed, because of that visual target they are able to access higher levels of speed and output and effort and performance. They don't always catch up to that person and win, but having a target a milestone is a powerful way that we can generate more force and energy in anything. And the visual system is the way that we bring those milestones into our brain, which then brings about epinephrin, which brings about neural firing, which allows us to access whatever resources happen to be available to us. So I find this fascinating because people often wonder, like where does the kick come from? Where is this kind of gift of an additional gear? Where is that deeper resource? And we often express it and talk about it, in kind of psychological terms like heart or willpower or that something kind of got transplanted into us or descended into us. And not to remove any of the spiritual aspects of sport or running or effort of the human, you know, heart. But it's very clear that the nervous system when it has a specific visual target can generate the sorts of intense effort that it couldn't otherwise. And it sometimes even comes as a surprise to the person generating the effort. I promised that I would talk about programming, meaning when and how many times a week to do the various workouts related to endurance and how to merge those with other types of exercise that you might be doing for strength or yoga or other things that you might be doing like work and other things, unrelated to exercise. Since that's a vast space with many different parameters and you all have different lives and lifestyles and backgrounds with fitness, et cetera. What I'm going to do is I'm going to put three different levels if you will or protocols that one could adopt in a link on the show notes. So in the caption on YouTube, if you click on that link, you'll be able to see three possible combinations of endurance work, strength, and hypertrophy work or endurance work, flexibility and hypertrophy work that are grounded in many of the major publications that Dr. Andy Galpin and colleagues and other people have described including this review that's also linked there on concurrent training and how one can use concurrent training, meaning training for endurance, training for strength, training for hypertrophy, training for all these different things without having to train constantly everyday twice a day, et cetera. So if you are interested in taking the protocols that you learned about in this episode and in previous episodes and combining those, we've placed them there for you as a completely zero cost resource. Please understand they are not wholly... Costello agrees. They are not wholly. There will be variation in terms of what people can tolerate and what they have time for? But I think they'll serve as a useful guideline in getting started or in continuing with an expanding on existing endurance work, strength work, hypertrophy work and so forth. Just really quickly. We didn't talk about supplements much today. In the previous episodes I talked about the phosphocreatine system and supplementing with creatine, I talked about beta alanine for kind of moderate duration work. You know really the only things that have been shown to really improve endurance work across the four varieties of endurance work I described today. They have essentially two forms. One, are stimulants. So things like caffeine will definitely improve endurance work and power output. There's a little bit of evidence that caffeine intake can actually inhibit the function of the creating system, but it's just one study. But that's interesting. If you want to read that study, you can put caffeine into www.examine.com and it will take you to that study. Many people get sore after workouts, in particular workouts that involve a lot of eccentric loading or workouts that are very novel where they've kind of pushed it instead of moving gradually as I suggest into say high intensity anaerobic endurance work of three sets of 20 seconds on 100 seconds rest. Maybe you get over ambitious and you do eight sets. In which case you are extremely sore. Certain forms of magnesium in particular, magnesium malate, M-A-L-A-T-E. Have been shown to be useful for removing or reducing the amount of delayed onset muscle soreness. That form of magnesium is distinctly different than the sorts of magnesium that are good for getting us into sleep. Things like magnesium three and eight and Bisglycinate. And then there's this whole thing about beet powder and beet juices and things that increase nitric oxide and allow for more vasodilation and therefore delivery of blood to muscle and neurons and other tissues for long bouts of endurance work. Some people like beet juice and they related compounds that increase arginine and vasodilation. Some people don't. Some people don't feel good when they take those. Some people also don't feel good when they take beta alanine, because it can give them this feeling of kind of like itchy, creepy crawlies under the skin kind of the niacin phenomenon, the niacin flush. Some people don't mind that, or some people don't experience that. So when it comes to supplementation there's a lot of variety. But magnesium malate has been shown to reduce soreness as sometimes that's good. Cold and hot contrast therapy for soreness things of that sort. But in general, we focused mainly today on behavioral tools. You'll notice that all of the tools are accessible without the need for lots of equipment. So I didn't say you need a rower, or you need a kettlebell though those will work. And I hope I was able to illustrate for you that endurance isn't just one thing. It's not just the ability to go for long bouts of exercise of different kinds, that there's also this mental component because of the way that neurons work. And also that there are these different forms of endurance of muscular endurance, that where you're going to fail 'cause of the muscles and muscle energy utilization and the nerves that innovate those muscles locally not because of a failure to bring in oxygen or blood. Whereas long duration effort. It's going to be more about, you know, being below your VO2 max, and your ability to be efficient for long bouts of more than 12 minutes of exercise. One set, as they say of 12 minutes to maybe several hours. I should just mention with long duration type work. You know, you could even imagine raking in the yard or mowing a lawn depending on how big that lawn is. I use to have job when I was a kid mowing lawns and I'll tell you, we didn't have many neighbors with very big lawns, but there are a few of them felt huge 'cause they were really convoluted. And if you're pushing that mower, and these were the old fashioned mowers not electric mowers, it's work. That's also of the sort that we call long duration endurance work. High intensity training we'll tap into yet other fuel sources and mechanisms as we learned today. So if you are enjoying this podcast and you're finding the information useful, it would be great if you would subscribe to the YouTube channel that really helps us quite a lot. And if you like, you can click the notifications button on YouTube as well. That way you're sure to never miss an episode. We always release episodes on Monday, but we also saw sometimes release episodes in between Mondays. So please do subscribe to the YouTube channel. Please also give us feedback in the comment section on the YouTube channel. That's where you can tell us about topics that you want to hear more about. Or if you have questions about a given episode or content within an episode, that's where you want to put that feedback. If you're not already subscribing on Apple and Spotify as well, please do that. On Apple you can give us up to a five-star review. We like to think that you would give us a five-star review. But you can also leave comments on Apple about the podcast more generally. And again, those are all zero cost ways that you can really help support the podcast. We do have a Patreon. It is www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman, at www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman. You can support the podcast at any level that you like. Please also check out our sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning of the podcast. I know ad reads are not the first thing that people want to hear when they're getting ready to consume scientific information. Please understand that the ads and the sponsors allow us to bring the zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to everybody. So if you have the means, check out the sponsors. We only work with sponsors whose products we really believe in and that I actually use and really love. There's no obligation, however. And we do talk about supplements from time to time. Again, no obligation to use supplements. We also talk about behavioral tools, but if you are interested in supplements, please go to www.examine.com to evaluate those supplements and their various effects. If you're curious about that. And we work with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E. Thorne is a supplement manufacturer that we believe has the highest levels of stringency in terms of the quality of the supplements. And they are very precise and very stringent about the amounts of each of those compounds in the given supplements. This is a huge problem elsewhere in the supplement industry. Many brands don't include what they say they include on the bottle. It seems to show up every time people test different brands. But Thorne continually tests out with the highest levels of accuracy and stringency. If you want to see the supplements that I take, you can go to www.thorne.com/u/huberman. And if you do that you can see all the supplements that I take. You can get 20% off any of those supplements as well. If you want to navigate into the main Thorne site and you see a supplement that you're interested in, you'll also get 20% off any of those supplements as well. So that's www.thorne.com/u/huberman. So we have both cost-free and other ways to help support the podcast. If you know people that might be interested in the podcast and benefit from the information, please recommend it to them. That really helps us. If you're on Instagram, check us out @hubermanlab. If you're on Twitter, it's also @hubermanlab. And please check out our new website which is www.hubermanlab.com. There you can find all the episodes of all the podcasts batched according to topic in every format, YouTube, Apple and Spotify with links out to those. It's searchable by keywords that you're interested in. So sleep or exercise, weight training, strength, fat loss, et cetera. And you can subscribe to our newsletter, the Neural Network which will allow you to get zero cost updates about speaking events, about any book releases or exciting things that I'm reading that I think you would enjoy reading as well. As well as protocols related to science in some summary and important notes from the podcast. And last but not least on behalf of myself and Costello who's finally waking up for... Oh, no, he went back to sleep. Thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 325 ---
Video ID: XLr2RKoD-oY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XLr2RKoD-oY
Title: Science of Muscle Growth, Increasing Strength & Muscular Recovery
Published: 2021-05-31 12:00:24 UTC
Description:
In this episode I describe how our brain and nervous system control muscle tissue and how to leverage that for muscle maintenance, growth (hypertrophy) and recovery. I explain muscle metabolism and muscle fiber recruitment. I detail protocols for increasing muscular growth and for neuro-muscular recovery. I explain the effects of deliberate cold, anti-inflammatory agents, and anti-histamines on training progress. I describe science-supported protocols using certain weight load ranges, total sets per week, training intensity, frequency, and in-between set activities if one's goal is to increase muscle growth, strength or endurance. I review three foundational compounds and nutrients and three optimization compounds and nutrients that have been shown to improve neuro-muscular performance. Finally, I explain how to leverage exercise and weight training to enhance cognitive function.

#HubermanLab #MuscleGrowth #Exercise

Thank you to our sponsors
InsideTracker - https://insidetracker.com/huberman   
Headspace - https://headspace.com/specialoffer

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introduction 
00:10:58 Protocol For Fat Loss: (Zero-Cost) PDF Available At: thecoldplunge.com
00:12:45 Muscle Is A Slave To the Nervous System
00:16:22 Why We Have A Brain
00:17:38 Flexors, Extensors, & Mutual Inhibition
00:20:00 How Muscles Move, Making & Using Muscle Energy: Making ATP
00:23:29 The “Burn” Is Not Lactic Acid. Lactate: A Buffer (Prevents Acidity), Fuel, & Hormone
00:26:11 Feeling the Burn For 10% of Workouts Is Good For Brain, Heart, Liver
00:27:30 Leveraging Lactate To Enhance Brain Function
00:29:40 Breathing Properly Through “The Burn”— For Sake of Performance & Brain Function
00:30:47 Neurogenesis (New Neurons) & Exercise: Not Much, In Humans… Which Is Good.
00:33:39 How To Contract Muscles, Make Them Bigger and/or Stronger: Henneman’s Principle
00:36:58 A Large Range of Weight (30-80% of One Repetition Maximum) Can Be Used 
00:38:58 What Makes Muscles To Grow? Stress, Tension, & Damage; Myosin Balloons
00:45:22 Figuring Out Which of Your Muscles Will Grow & Get Stronger Easily (Or Not)
00:48:11 Getting Stronger Versus Muscle Growth: Distributed Versus Local Effort
00:50:47 How Much Resistance Should (Most) People Use? (30-80% Range) & Specific Goal
00:54:25 How Many Sets Per Week To Maintain Or To Grow Muscle & Get Stronger 
00:56:43 10% Of Resistance Training Should Be To “Failure”, the Rest Should End “Near” Failure
00:58:23 Number of Sets: Inversely Related To the Ability to Generate High Force Contractions 
01:00:09 How Long Should Weight Training Sessions Last
01:01:35 Training Duration & Volume 
01:03:51 Range of Motion & Speed of Movement; The Key Role of (Upper Motor) Neurons
01:08:10 Customizing Training; 1-6 Month Experiments; Key Elements Summarized
01:09:28 Focal Contractions Between Sets To Enhance Hypertrophy, Not Performance
01:11:26 The Optimal Resistance Training Protocol To Optimize Testosterone Release 
01:16:00 How Quickly To Complete Repetitions; Interset Rest Times & Activities; Pre-Exhaustion
01:20:43 Tools To Determine If You Have Recovered From Previous Training: Local & Systemic
01:26:33 Carbon Dioxide Tolerance Test For Assessing Recovery
01:32:43 The Way To End Every Training Session. How To Breath Between Sets For Performance
01:34:46 How & When To Use Cold Exposure To Enhance Recovery; When To Avoid Cold
01:36:37 Antihistamines & Anti-Inflammatory Drugs: Can Be Problematic/Prevent Progress
01:38:42 Foundational Supplements For Recovery: EPA, Vitamin D3, Magnesium Malate
01:41:08 Ensuring Proper Nerve-Muscle Firing: Sodium, Potassium, Magnesium
01:45:00 Creatine: Good? How Much? Cognitive Effects. Hormonal Considerations: DHT
01:50:12 Beta-Alanine, Beet Juice; Note About Arginine & Citrulline & Cold Sores
01:52:00 Nutrition: Protein Density: Leucine Thresholds; Meal Frequency 
01:55:54 Why Hard Workouts Can Make It Hard To Think/Do Mental Work
01:57:25 Leveraging Weight Training & Rest Days To Optimize Cognitive Work
01:58:58 What Time Of Day Is Best To Resistance Train? 
01:59:40 More Information Resources, Subscribing (Zero-Cost) To Support

Disclaimer: https://hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 326 ---
Video ID: GqPGXG5TlZw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GqPGXG5TlZw
Title: How to Lose Fat with Science-Based Tools
Published: 2021-05-24 12:00:06 UTC
Description:
This episode I describe the science of fat loss, including how fat is mobilized and oxidized (burned) and how to increase fat burning by leveraging the nervous system. Most people don't realize it, but our neurons connect to our fat and release epinephrine/adrenaline to facilitate fat oxidation. I explain how this can be accomplished with non-exercise movements such as fidgeting to burn thousands of calories of fat a day-- a practice is rarely discussed but very well supported by the science literature. I also discuss an optimal fat loss protocol using cold to create shiver, and how specific types and timing of exercise impact fat loss. I discuss if exercising fasted indeed increases fat oxidation-- it turns out the type and duration of exercise really matters. And I discuss the use of caffeine, GLP1 from Mate or guayusa and emerging new prescription compounds for fat loss. The episode includes a lot of tools, links to cost-free resources and explanation of the science underlying each tool for fat loss.

#HubermanLab #FatLoss #Science

Thank you to our sponsors:
InsideTracker - http://insidetracker.com/huberman
ExpressVPN - http://expressvpn.com/huberman
Athletic Greens - http://athleticgreens.com/huberman

Cold Protocols via The Cold Plunge:
https://thecoldplunge.com/pages/protocols

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab/

Website - https://hubermanlab.com

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introduction 
00:06:00 Fat Loss: The Key Role of Neurons 
00:08:44 The First Law of Fat Loss 
00:11:00 Neurons Connect To Fat! (& That Really Matters) 
00:13:38 5 Pillars of Metabolism: Sleep, Essential Fatty Acids, Glutamine, Microbiome, Thyroid 
00:19:20 Mindset Truly Matters: Amazing Examples of Beliefs on Fat Loss 
00:23:08 Our Brain Talks To Our Fat
00:25:00 The Most Incredible & Dangerous Fat Loss Agent 
00:27:28 Losing Fat Is a Two-Part Process: Mobilization and Oxidation  
00:32:25 The Critical Role of Adrenaline/Epinephrine, But NOT from Adrenal Glands 
00:34:45 Fidgeting & Shivering: A Powerful Science-Supported Method For Fat Loss 
00:41:24 How Fidgeting Works: Promotes Epinephrine Release into Fat. “N-E-A-T” 
00:44:55 Two Ways of Using Shivering To Accelerate Fat Loss  
00:47:30 White, Brown & Beige Fat; & Using Cold-Induced Shiver To Burn Fat 
00:50:25 How To Use Cold Properly To Stimulate Fat Loss: Succinate Release Is Key/Shiver 
00:52:26 Exact Protocols: (1-5X per week); Don’t Adapt! Submerge and Exit “Sets & Reps” 
00:56:15 thecoldplunge.com see “protocols” tab Cold-Shiver-Fat-Loss Tool (cost free) 
00:58:03 If Fat-Loss Is Your Goal, Avoid Cold Adaptation: Remember Polar Bear Swimmers  
00:58:17 Irisin: Underwhelming; Succinate Is The Real Deal 
01:00:00 Brown Fat, Why Babies Can’t Shiver and Becoming a Hotter Furnace, Adding Heat 
01:01:55 Ice On Back of The Neck, Cold Underpants: Not A Great Idea For Fat Loss 
01:04:00 A Key Paper For the Aficionados: www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2826518/ 
01:05:00 Spot Reduction: There May Be Hope After All. Targeting Specific Fat Pads. 
01:09:20 Exercising For Fat Loss: What Is Best? High Intensity, Sprinting, Moderate Intensity?  
01:13:30 Exercising Fasted: Does It Truly Accelerate Fat Loss/Oxidation.  
01:16:30 The 90 Minute Rule: After 90 Minutes, The Fasted Exercisers Start To Burn More Fat 
01:18:15 If High-Intensity Training Is Done First, The Benefits of Fasting Arrive Before 90min. 
01:22:44 Post-Exercise Metabolic Increases: How To Bias This Toward Fat Oxidation 
01:26:05 A Protocol For Exercise-Induced Fat Loss; Adrenalin Is The Effector 
01:28:50 Supplements/Compounds For Fat Loss Part: Caffeine Fidgeting, & Caffeine Adaptation 
01:34:30 Ephedrine, Fenfluramine: Removed From Market Due to Safety Concerns 
01:35:22 GLP1 (Glucagon-Like Peptide 1), Yerba Mate, Guayusa Tea, Semaglutide  
01:40:30 Berberine, Metformin: Glucose/Insulin Reduction, Increase Fat Oxidation: But Caution 
01:41:28 Gardner Lab Results: What You Eat May Not Matter, But Adherence Is Key Tool 
01:43:00 examine.com & Enter “Yerba Mate”: Lowers Heart Rate Even Though Is a Stimulant 
01:44:35 Acetly-L-Carnitine: Facilitates Fat Oxidation 
01:48:00 Summary List of Tools & How Nervous System Controls Fat Loss 
01:51:20 Cost Free & Other Ways To Support Our Podcast, Making Sure We See Feedback 

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've been getting my blood work done for many years now, and that's where the simple reason that only through quality blood work, and now through the advent of DNA test can one really get a clear picture of what's going on with their health. Things like metabolic factors and hormones, all the various triglycerides. These are things that can only be measured from a quality blood test. And now with DNA tests, you can get an additional window into your current health status and the trajectory of your health. What's really wonderful about InsideTracker is that you don't just get numbers back about the specific levels of various hormones and metabolic factors, you also get a lot of information about what you could or should do in order to adjust those numbers to put you on the course to better health. So for instance, it will give recommendations about particular foods to eat or avoid, particular exercise regimens that you might want to adopt and the frequency of those regimens in order to move those markers in the correct direction. InsideTracker has also added a new feature that makes tracking your progress and analyzing your data even easier. For those of you that use a Garmin fitness tracker such as the Garmin watch, that's now compatible with their platform. So you can couple your data from your Garmin with your blood and DNA for even more personalization and insights on your health. However, if you don't have a Garmin device, there's still a lot that you can get from InsideTracker and their tests. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can visit www.insidetracker.com/huberman. And if you do that, you'll get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Use the code Huberman at checkout, that's www.insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans and use the code Huberman at checkout. Today's podcast is also brought to us by ExpressVPN. ExpressVPN is a virtual private network that keeps your data secure and private. It does that by routing your internet activity through their servers and encrypting it, so that no one can see or sell your data. I'm familiar with the effects of not securing my data well enough. A few years back I had my bank accounts hacked. I don't know exactly how it happened, but it happened. And it was a terrible amount of work to have that reversed and secured. The great thing about ExpressVPN is I don't even notice that it's running. I have it on my computer, I turn it on anytime I work at home or when traveling or in a cafe airport anywhere, and it runs in the background, it doesn't change anything about the interface with my computer or the wifi. It just secures my data and it secures any information about what I happen to be searching for, et cetera. I don't feel like I have anything particular to hide except my bank account passwords and things of that sort. But with ExpressVPN, it basically makes everything secure, you can't be tracked and no one can access or steal your data, which is terrific. So again, I use it when I'm traveling and when I'm at home. If you want to start protecting your internet activity using ExpressVPN, you can go to www.expressvpn.com/huberman and you'll get an extra three months free on a one-year package. That's www.expressvpn.com/huberman to get three months free on any of their one-year packages. Today's podcast is also brought to us by Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral, probiotic drink, that gives you a total foundation of vitamins and minerals and probiotics to support your health and wellbeing. I've been using Athletic Greens since 2012. And so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. I started using Athletic Greens and I still use Athletic Greens once or twice a day because it's the simplest and most straightforward way to get my basis of important vitamins, minerals and probiotic taken care off. All of those things combined to support various aspects of my health, such as brain health, such as gut health. For instance, there's a tremendous amount of evidence now showing that probiotics support gut health and that the gut brain access is important for things like focus and cognition, as well as for immune function and various aspects of physical health, like metabolism. The list sort of goes on and on. With Athletic Greens, it has all these vitamins and minerals and various other things that are good for me, and I actually really liked the way it tastes. So the way I use it is once a day, sometimes twice a day, I'll mix it up with water, I add a little bit of lemon or lime juice. I think it tastes great without the lemon or lime juice. But when I add that, it's truly delicious to me. And I'll drink that first thing in the day, mid-morning sometimes instead and sometimes again in the later afternoon. I'm able to drink Athletic Greens late in the day and not have it keep me awake. If you want to try Athletic Greens, you can go to www.athleticgreens.com/huberman, and if you do that, you can claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs, which make mixing up Athletic Greens while you're on the road, really simple and easy. And they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3+K2. Vitamin D3, as many of you know, you can get from the sun, but many people even if they're already getting a lot of sun exposure, still have vitamin D3 levels that are too low. And vitamin D3 is very important for a huge number of cardiovascular, immune, metabolic and other aspects of health. So once again, if you go to www.athleticgreens.com/huberman, you'll get the five travel packs and a year supply of vitamin D3+K2. Today is the third episode in our series of episodes about physical and athletic skill performance and skill learning in general. And today we're going to talk about the science of tools for fat loss. And fat loss is something that interests a large number of people. Many people want to lose fat, many people are athletes who need to lose fat. And in general, we know that having body fat percentages that are too high is unhealthy for us. And most people struggle to lose fat. Most people struggled to lose weight generally, but most people especially struggled to lose body fat or what we call adipose tissue. Now, this is a huge topic on the internet. There's a lot of controversy. Today, we're going to talk about some things related to fat loss, and that are powerful for fat loss that I'm guessing most of you have never heard about before. You may have heard about a few of them, but I'm guessing you haven't heard about all of them. This episode is going to be rich with science-based tools that are gleaned from a variety of aspects of the literature, including the use of cold, including brown fat, including something called beige fat. We're going to talk about something called NEAT. We're going to talk about all sorts of aspects of fat loss that are governed by your nervous system. And this is I think an important gap that's missing in the discussion about fat loss. You can hear a lot of information out there about the role of things like insulin and various diets like ketogenic diets or vegan diets or Mediterranean diets. And there's some great stuff out there, and there's some really terrible information out there, and there's a lot of controversy. We did a number of episodes talking about the role of hormones on metabolism and the role of food on mood and wellbeing. So if you're interested in those topics, please check them out. I will touch a little bit on hormones today. Things like insulin and leptin, just a little bit. But today's episode is mainly going to be focused on, how the nervous system, neurons, and some of the cells they collaborate with, like glioma and macrophages, how those encourage or can encourage accelerated fat loss. Because it turns out they can. Remember your nervous system which includes your brain and your spinal cord and all the connections that they make with the organs of the body, governs everything. It's the on switch and the off switch for immune system. It's the on switch and the off switch. It turns out also for fat burning. And so the nervous system and the role of the brain and other neurons has been vastly overlooked in the discussion about losing fat. Now, I would be remiss and I'd probably come under a pretty considerable attack, if I didn't just acknowledge upfront a core truth of metabolic science and also of neuroscience, frankly, which is that calories in versus calories out, meaning how many calories you ingest, versus how many calories you burn is the fundamental and most important formula in this business of fat loss and weight management in general. There's simply no way around the fact that if you ingest far more calories than you burn, you're likely to gain weight. And a good portion of that weight is likely to be adipose tissue fat. It's also true that if you ingest fewer calories than you burn, that you will lose weight, and that a significant portion of that will come from body fat. What portion? Depends on a number of factors. But that simple formula is important. On a previous episode, I mentioned the complications with the statements of a calorie is a calorie. And indeed there is evidence from for instance Robert Lustig, who's a pediatric endocrinologist at UC San Francisco has talked about how highly processed foods change the way that we utilize food, and can lead to higher incidences of obesity and other metabolic syndromes that go against the idea that a calorie is a calorie and that's it. So a calorie is a calorie as a unit of energy, and we need to accept and acknowledge this calories in, meaning calories ingested versus calories burned formula. But the calories burn portion is strongly influenced by a number of things that you can control that can greatly accelerate or increase the amount of adipose tissue or the proportion of adipose tissue that you burn in response to exercise and food. So your hormones are important. Your thermogenic milieu, meaning how warm or how cold your body is? How cold you make it, how warm you make it? But also your level of metabolism. Your levels of thyroid hormone and something that's hardly ever discussed, but is well supported by the scientific literature, how much innervation? Meaning how much connectivity there is, between your nervous system and fat. Today, we're going to talk about the fact that your body fat of various kinds, and there are several kinds of body fat are actually innervated by neurons. Neurons connect to your body fat and can change the probability that that body fat will be burned or not. So your nervous system is the master controller of this process, and it plays a strong role in the calories out, the calories burned component. So as usual, we're going to discuss a little bit of science. I promise I won't go too deep into lipolysis and all sorts of things related to fat oxidation. We're going to break down that process into two important steps. And if you can understand those two important steps then the rest of the tools will be very straightforward to understand and manage. And I do believe that today you will walk away with many new tools that you could incorporate into any kind of fat loss regimen that will greatly accelerate that process, because it's grounded in quality peer-reviewed science. Throughout the episode, I'm going to talk about some behavioral tools. In fact, I'll mostly talk about behavioral tools. I will also talk about compound, supplements. Many of you are into supplements. Some of you aren't, and that's fine. For those of you that are into supplements, an important issue in a discussion about supplements for fat loss or otherwise is going to be the quality of those supplements and the accuracy about what's in those supplement bottles and tablets, et cetera. I usually mention this at the end of the podcast, but this podcast we've partnered with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E. Because Thorne we believe has the highest levels of stringency in terms of the quality of the compounds in their supplements and the amounts of those compounds. If you want to see the supplements I take, you can go to www.thorne.com/u/huberman. You can see the supplements that I take, that will also allow you to get 20% off any of those supplements, or 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. Thorne has partnered with the Mayo Clinic and all the major sports teams. So there's a very strong basis for their stringency. Again, you don't need to use supplements. I'm certainly not encouraging anyone to use supplements if that's not your thing, but if you're going to use supplements, make sure that your supplement source is one a very high quality. With that said, I want to get started and talk about the various tools for fat loss and how neuroscience, neurons control fat loss. Before I do that, I want to set the context correctly and extract some of the key takeaways from previous episodes, because if your foundation of health and your foundation of hormones and your foundation of metabolism isn't right, it's going to be very hard to get the most out of any kind of exercise or fat loss protocol. In previous episodes, I talked all about the science and the details going into particular protocols. We don't have time to do that now, and I want to get to the new material. However, there are a couple bins, a couple items that you should make sure you're getting correctly. And if you're not perfect about these, don't worry about it, most people are not perfect about them, I'm certainly not perfect about them. But we should all be striving to get quality and sufficient sleep. I did four full episodes on sleep and how to get better at sleeping through things like light exposure, temperature, timing your sleep correctly for your so-called chronotype, if you're a night owl or a morning person. That's the first four or I think five episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast. Get your sleep right, get your light exposure right, avoid bright light in your eyes at times you wanted to be asleep, and get bright light in your eyes at times you want to be awake. So get your sleep right. The other thing is essential fatty acids. I talked about this in the food and mood episode, but I also talked about it during the hormones episodes. We need fatty acids. They are vital to so many aspects of our health. You don't have to get them from supplements. You can, if you want to, but you need to get them from your food. They are essential. There's a reason there's an E the essential part there. Of the fatty acids, there are multiple kinds, but for the antidepressant effects where the levels of fatty acids that will promote good mood and also healthy metabolism and we'll start to shift the needle in the right direction on bloodborne cardiovascular factors. The key thing is to get the levels of EPA that you ingest above 1000 milligrams per day. So that doesn't mean just taking a thousand milligrams or more of say fish oil or krill oil or whatever your preferred source is. It means getting above a thousand milligrams of EPA which may require that you ingest more essential fatty acids than just a thousand milligrams per day. That of course can be done through food sources, things like fatty fish, or if you're not into eating fish, you've quality meats that are grass raised can do that. There are other sources of essential fatty acids, of course also from plant sources. So look, those up online. It's really easy to find. But the research and the literature shows that you want to get above a thousand milligrams of EPA per day, because that's when you can best support your metabolism and position yourself for good fat loss. As well for people who have cravings issues, they crave sweets all the time, I talked about this in the gut-brain episode and hormones and food. That you have neurons in your gut that are craving, they're seeking essential fatty acids and they're craving and seeking amino acids from your food. Now, these are not supplements that they crave per se, they're craving those things because that's what your body needs and your brain needs. But those same neurons will respond to sugars. And so many people who are craving sugar can satisfy that sugar craving by giving the neurons so to speak what they actually want, which are amino acids and essential fatty acids. That includes EPA, but also things like glutamine and amino acid that can really reduce sugar cravings if you take a teaspoon of that, or even a tablespoon of that a few times a day. You have to ease into that a little bit, because some people can get a little bit of GI distress from too much glutamine. But glutamine has also been shown to improve symptoms of leaky gut. It's a powerful amino acid. And yes, you can also get it from food. Things like cottage cheese are high in glutamine, et cetera. And then finally you can't really position yourself to have a strong metabolism if your iodine levels aren't correct, and your thyroid levels aren't correct. You can overdo iodine. So you don't want to do that. A lot of table salt has iodine added to it, but some people need to add iodine, by ingesting things like kelp, et cetera.. But one of the best ways to support the thyroid system and metabolism in general, is to make sure you're getting enough selenium. Sometimes called selenium each day. Simple way to do that is to ingest the highest concentration of selenium food that I'm aware of, which is Brazil nuts, one or two or three of those per day. You'll have more than enough selenium to meet the thyroid needs. You don't want your selenium to be too high, you don't want a diet too high in anything. So again, sleep, sufficient EPAs, glutamine if you have issues with leaky gut or sugar cravings can really help. Get your gut microbiome, right? I may have missed saying that, but get your gut microbiome right. That does not necessarily mean you need to ingest probiotics. You can, if you want to, but you can also just simply ingest a serving or two of fermented foods per day, that can greatly assess. So things like sauerkraut, kimchi, every culture has a different source or sources of fermented foods, those can really help the gut microbiome, and then make sure that your thyroid hormone is supported through the ingestion of sufficient iodine not too much and sufficient selenium, not too much. Okay? Sleep, EPA, glutamine, fermented foods, iodine and selenium. That sets the basis for how things like exercise, cold and some of the compounds and other things that we're going to talk about today that are I'm guessing going to be truly new to many of you that can really increase the burn factor in the equation of calories in versus calories burned. Okay? So on the one hand we have this reality of calories in, versus calories burned. However, I would also be remiss if I didn't mention an incredible study that was done by my colleague, Alia Crum at Stanford. She's a faculty member, professor in the psychology department. Looking at how belief affects, just thinking can impact the effects of things like exercise on weight loss. These are just incredible results. What they did was they took subjects who were hotel service people that would clean the hotels and come in and change the linens and so forth. Divide them into two groups. One group, they were told moving around and doing your duties for your job, meet the standards for US guidelines for activity and movement, et cetera. And a basic lecture about how movement is good for you, et cetera. But mostly just that their daily activities met the standards for the US. The other group, however, was given a bunch of information about how movement and their daily routine was very good for cardiovascular health, it could be good for weight loss, et cetera. And then they tracked these subjects over a period of many weeks. The take home message from this study was that simply being told that movement is good for you can lead to weight loss, et cetera. Led to significantly more body fat loss, waist-to-hip ratio changes in the direction that most people would want. But essentially a slimming down, if you will. And all sorts of other positive effects on things like cardiovascular health. Simply by the knowledge that movement and exercise can help various health markers. So this is remarkable and it speaks to the power of the nervous system and the power of belief in governing aspects of our body and our physiology that one would otherwise think we're outside our conscious control. Now, of course, any of you that think scientifically which I imagine if you watch this podcast or listen to this podcast is all of you by now probably thinking, well, maybe they just moved around more, or maybe they stood up and sat down more, maybe they did something else that was different. And indeed there's a strong possibility that they did things differently than the other group, but the mere knowledge that exercise is good for you, that movement is good for you, shifted their behavior and their physiology in the direction of enhanced weight loss, fat loss, et cetera. So how we think about a given set of activities affects how we perform those activities. And how we think about and perform those activities has a real effect on our physiology. So somewhere between the hard and fast rule that governs fat loss and weight loss, which is if you ingest more calories than you burn, you'll either maintain or gain weight. Typically, you'll gain weight, although not always. If you ingest about as many calories as you burn, you'll maintain weight, typically. And if you ingest fewer calories than you burn, typically you'll lose weight. That's the kind of rule of fat loss. And yet we also have these belief effects which show, and this has been replicated again and again, that how we think about a process, whether or not we think it's beneficial can change our physiology in ways that can be beneficial to us. Somewhere in between those two extremes of hardcore metabolic science and belief of why a bunch of protocols that are grounded in quality peer-reviewed science and in physiology that you can leverage to increase the rates of fat loss. And so that's what we're going to talk about today. I love this topic and it's not that I'm so obsessed with fat loss, but rather the first the project I ever worked on in science was thermogenesis and fat loss. I joined a laboratory as an undergraduate, and the guy I worked for loved to explore new compounds and how they impacted thermogenesis. And so we looked at how things like MDMA/Ecstasy, how antipsychotics, antidepressants, various weight loss drugs that were on the market. How those impacted body temperature and fat loss and metabolism? And we just had so much fun doing it. So if you detect a smile on my face, that's what that's about. And I also learned a lot, and I also came to really appreciate that this tissue of our bodies, adipose tissue and fat, we think of as just this unfortunate thing that's like we're told it's a core energy source if we ever entered a famine and that's all true, et cetera. You come to realize that the cells in our body, they are there as fuel for the furnace of our body, which is our metabolism. And there's a third player. And that's where it really gets interesting. That the nervous system, neurons has the opportunity to turn up the intensity of that furnace. It has the opportunity to increase the amount of heat that we produce and therefore the amount of energy that we burn. And I was also really intrigued by something which is that, growing up, I think we all know people who can eat a tone and never seem to gain any body fat. Or people who seem to eat very little and seem to gain body fat very easily. And I was always intrigued by that. And it turns out there are a number of different factors that relate to that. But the nervous system is the one that we can really control. Both through behaviors and what we eat, but also in terms of this thing that we call thermogenesis. There was one particular story I want to relate to, that does not suggest any protocol. In fact, I'm going to discourage you from following this protocol. Please do not try the compound that I'm about to describe. One of the favorite things that we like to do in that lab was to find rare compounds and test them. And at the time I was reading about thermogenesis and I learned about a compound that was actually discovered in the armory factories of World War II. And it was discovered because women in particular who were working in these factories would take a brush and dip it in a compound or a paint rather, and they would then paint the numbers with a stencil onto things like bombs and ammunition of various kinds. And they were losing weight like crazy. It turns out that occasionally they'd lick the brush, and then they would go back just to get a sharper point on the brush, and then they would paint onto these various bullets and missiles and so forth. Bombs and so forth. And they started shedding all their body fat. And many of them losed, excuse me, lost a lot of weight, a significant portion of their weight without changing anything else that they were doing, what they were eating, et cetera. It turned out that that compound is something called Dinitrophenol, DNP. And over the years Dinatrophenol, DNP has gained popularity in some niche cultures, mainly bodybuilders, athletes even in the modeling industry. It is a absolutely terrible compound for anyone to use, because it's highly fatal if your body temperature goes too high. Hyperthermia will kill you. And indeed many people have died using Dinatrophenol as a weight loss drug or attempting to use it as a weight loss drug. But Dinitophenol really illustrates a principle which is that your metabolism includes things like thyroid hormone and growth hormone, et cetera. But your body temperature and the way you utilize energy is controlled by your nervous system. And the way Dinatrophenol works is by changing the neurons and the way that the neurons that connect to fat change the way fat burns up. So we are not going to suggest, I am not suggesting that you use Dinatrophenol. However, there are other things that you can do that can change the relationship between these neurons and the fat of your body in ways that can powerfully accelerate fat loss. And I don't know why we don't hear about these things more, but probably because most of what you see out there on the internet focuses more on what you could eat and should eat or shouldn't eat. It concentrates on exercise regimens which we will also talk about. But the burn factor, your thermogenic environment is one of the, if not the most important factors in this business of fat loss. And since I'm a neuroscientist that's what we're going to talk about. So let's talk about fat utilization. Let's talk about how fat is converted into energy which is sometimes also called fat burning. What I'd like you to know is that this is a two-part process. Okay? In reality, there are many biochemical steps. And if you log onto the internet, or you open up a textbook and you want to learn about fat utilization, you're going to see a lot of chemistry. And I'm happy to go deep into that chemistry if you like. But I think most of you are probably interested in what are the leverage points? Where can you exert control over this process in ways that benefit you? So I'm going to focus mainly on those. Okay? This is not to upset the aficionados and I will put in some nomenclature, but here we go. There's two parts to this process. One, is fat mobilization. And the second is fat oxidation or utilization. Okay? So the first thing that has to happen for body fat to get burned up or used and reduced is that it has to get mobilized. And that's a process called lipolysis, but I actually don't care if you know the name lipolysis, you just have to move that fat out of the position that it's in. You have to get it out of the fat cells. All right? Fat cells can be visceral around our visceral organs or they can be subcutaneous under our skin. Most people are thinking about subcutaneous fat when they think about fat. So here's the deal. And if you want more detail, great, I'll touch on that in a bit. But basically stored fat has two parts that are relevant here. It's got the fatty acid part, and that's the part that your body can use. And that's attached to something called glycerol and they're linked by a backbone. So already, probably too much chemistry for both of you. But what you want is you want to break the backbone. So if you just can remember to mobilize fat, you got to break the backbone between glycerol and these fatty acids. Okay? That's accomplished by an enzyme called lipase, but you can forget all that if you want. Remember, we're just trying to mobilize fat. So the first step is to get those fatty acids moving around in the bloodstream to get them out of those fat cells. And then they can travel and be used for energy. And that second part, remember first part is mobilization. The second part is oxidation. Is then those fatty acids, those are potential fuel. They're just potential fuel, but you haven't burned the fat yet, you've just moved it out of your fat cells. They're going to go into cells that can use them for energy. And once they are inside those cells, they're still not burned up. You need to oxidize them. Think oxidation is the burnup part. They need to be moved into the mitochondria and then they can be converted into ATP into energy. So just to really zoom out again to make sure I don't lose anybody. You got to mobilize the fat, then you have to oxidize the fat. In other words, you have to mobilize it, then you actually have to convert it into energy. If you just mobilize it, and you don't convert it into energy, you don't oxidize it, it can be returned to body fat. And many of the things that the nervous system can do, is to increase the mobilization of fat, but also the oxidation of fat. Okay? So you have two opportunities to burn more fat, and both of those opportunities are governed by your nervous system. By neurons that literally send little wires that we call axons into fat and release chemicals that provide a stimulus for more of that fat to be mobilized, and then later for more of that fat to be burned up. Okay? So we could go really deep on this, but I'm not going to go much deeper than that, because this isn't a biochemistry of fatty acid metabolism lecture. This is about how to burn fat using your nervous system. But remember, there's a mobilization step, and then there's an oxidation step. I think anyone of you, all of you should be able to internalize that. Mobilize then oxidize. Okay? Mobilize then oxidize. So what are these neurons that connect a fat doing? What are they releasing exactly? How do they actually increase fat mobilization? And how do they increase fat oxidation? Burning of fat. Well, there are a couple of things that they release that encourage that process. And the main one that you need to know about is epinephrine or adrenaline. The conversion of these fatty acids into ATP in the mitochondria of cells is favored by adrenaline. Okay? And adrenaline is released from two sources. Adrenaline is released from the adrenal glands, which set a top our kidneys and our lower back. And it's also released from the so-called sympathetic nervous system. Although that name is a bit of a misnomer, because it has nothing to do with sympathy, has to do with stimulating alertness and promoting action of the body. There's a big mistake in the literature that is finally being corrected among those who know. The mistake in the literature is that the adrenal glands and the release of adrenaline is what stimulates fat loss and fat oxidation. In fact, it was thought for a long time that adrenaline swimming around in your body of when you're fasted, because fasting can increase adrenaline or when you're engaging in intense exercise or when you're stressed is going to promote fat oxidation. That's actually not the case. The adrenaline that stimulates fat oxidation, the burning of fat is coming from neurons that actually connect to the fat, not hormones like adrenaline that are swimming around in your system. It's a local process. And this is very important because it means that, what you do, the specific patterns of movements and the specific environment you create that can stimulate these particular neurons to activate fat, meaning to release fat, to mobilize it and then to burn it, is going to be a powerful lever that you can use in order to increase fat loss. So what have we said so far? We've said that you've got to mobilize and you got to burn fat and that your nervous system is in control of that process. It's not just about calorie deficit. Okay, so let's talk about how to activate the nervous system in ways that it promotes more liberation, movement, mobilization of fat and more oxidation of fat. So one of the most powerful ways to stimulate epinephrin which is also called adrenaline from these neurons that connect to fat and to thereby stimulate more fat mobilization and oxidation is through movement. But I'm not talking about exercise. The type of movement that I'm referring to, is extremely subtle. And some of you may be familiar with this type of movement, but I'm guessing you're probably not familiar with what I'm about to tell you, which is that shiver or shivering is a strong stimulus for the release of adrenaline epinephrin into fat and the increase in fat oxidation and mobilization. But shiver is not just induced by cold, and there are other subtle forms of movement that can greatly increase fat metabolism and fat loss. There was a group in England during the 1960s and 70s that discovered a pathway by which subtle forms of movement can greatly increase fat loss. This is the work of Rothwell and Stock. It's very famous in the thermogenesis literature. And I learned about this early on, when I was an undergraduate and I asked, how did they come across this? And here's how the story goes. They were aware that some people overeat and yet don't put on weight. Other people overeat even just a little bit and they seem to accumulate extra adipose tissue. Now, this is long before all the discussions about microbiome and hormone factors, you know it was long before many of the hormone factors besides insulin had even been discovered. What they did was they examined people who overate and did not gain weight. And what they observed was that those people engaged in lots of subtle movement throughout the day. In other words, they were fidgeters. And that's what they call them. I'm not going to do the British accent version of fidgeters. But Roth and Stock were British. What they found were people that overeat but don't gain weight as a consequence. And in fact, many people who had low levels of body fat had a lot of resting tremor, not of the Parkinsonian type, but they would bounce their knee while they were sitting, when they would talk, they would engage in very angular movements, they were sort of electric. In fact, now in science, I was chuckling about this as I was diving back into this literature, because the other day I heard a wonderful lecture on a totally different topic from a colleague of mine and we all adore him. He's over in Europe and he's this tremendously successful scientist. So we like to poke fun at him. And every one of his movements is incredibly electric and staccato. And he's rail thin and he eats like a horse. And so it fits very well into the discovery of Rothwell and Stock who discovered that fidgeters people that bounce their knee, people that have a head bob while they're listening, people that nod a lot, people that stand up and sit down a lot throughout the day, and people that pace burn anywhere from 800 to 2,500 calories more than the control group in the experiments that they looked at. And indeed, there's been a modern look into all this, and these numbers check out that simply moving around a lot, even if those are subtle movements, greatly increases the amount of energy that you burn. And people who overeat, the people who can have the second or the third doughnut or doughnuts at all and don't seem to put on weight to the same degree, they are people that move around a lot even when seated. They're are people that will often move their limbs very quickly as well. There even have been studies that have explored other things that correlate with fidgeters. Fidgeters stand up very quickly at the end of a lecture or they start to gather their things very quickly, whereas non fidgeters don't. So dogs like my bulldog Costello, definitely not a fidgeter. Every movement is incredibly slow and deliberate. Sitting down as a process, if you ask him to sit down and sort of a slow motion. You ask him to get up and he kind of looks at you sighs and stands up. The fidgeter is the opposite of that, right? You say, how are you doing? They go, great. So even sometimes their speech will be accelerated although not always. But staccato movements, fidgeting, et cetera. And in 2015, and again in 2017, there've been studies that have explored this, using some modern metabolic tracking and indeed simply moving a lot, being a fidgeter, bouncing your knee, standing up and pacing several times or many times throughout the day led to considerable amounts of fat loss and weight loss when people were ingesting the same amount of food, if they overate, they were able to compensate and burn off that food. And if they were trying to lose weight and they incorporated this fidgeting protocol of deliberately trying to fidget more and move around during the day, pace, stand up more quickly, sit down more often, sit down and stand up more often rather. They found that they greatly increased their weight loss anywhere from 20 to 30% increases. And in some cases, you know, there always those few people who burned a lot more. It seems to work best in people who are already slightly overweight. So for people that are overweight, who are kind of averse to exercise, fidgeting might actually be a good entry point. And 800 to 2,500 calories is a considerable amount of calories when you really think about it. Now, why am I telling you this? Well, there's clearly a tool to export from this, which is that you can increase the amount of calories burned without having to go on additional long runs. I do hope that people are exercising regularly because it's so important for other aspects of brain and body health. But nonetheless, we are all time limited and we are not all so ready to embrace exercise. I have a family member who has been slowly coaxed into exercise, but if I were to tell her, for instance, you need to fidget more, she'd probably go for it. So this is a powerful way to increase the calories that are burned. Now, that's great. And you can think about the protocols. But I want to nest that protocol in what I said before, which is that, fat is controlled by these neurons and the epinephrin they release. You might say, well, how could these little micro movements lead to so much caloric burn? And that's where it really gets interesting. Rothwell and Stock and others that they worked with, subsequently found that these little fidgety movements, the engagement of certain aspects of our musculature that are nothing like exercise. It's not these large coordinated or rhythmic body movements, but rather subtle little bits of fidgety movement. And here I am doing a lot of fidgety movement as an example, tapping the pen, this kind of thing. I was probably that kid in class most of the time. And I was like, I try not to do it to irritate people, but I was definitely a knee bouncer. I'm not particularly lean or not. But I was definitely... This is a common activity for me. People that do that sort of thing, it turns out that it's not the kind of caloric burn that we normally think of, of like, oh, you'll running, lifting weights, swimming, yoga, et cetera. Those subtle movements of our core musculature, not just the core, but all our limbs and our musculature, those low level movements, they trigger epinephrin release from these neurons, and they stimulate the mobilization of fat. And then that fat is oxidized at higher rates. And I find this fascinating. I wish more people knew about it, which is why I'm telling you about it today. This has nothing to do with exercise in the traditional form, and yet 800 to 2,500 calories per day. That's a considerable amount of fat oxidized. If you are in a calorie maintenance mode or if you're sub caloric, that's going to add to it still additional fat loss. The data on this are tremendous. I'll link to a few studies. If you're really interested in learning about what's called neat. N-E-A-T which is non-exercise activity thermogenesis. NEAT. So what's the protocol? Fidget. If you're really interested in burning calories and you already exercise, you want to burn more or you don't have the opportunity to exercise or you're averse to exercise for whatever reason, fidgeting, movements, staccato movement, standing up, walking around, pacing, all the sort of nervous activities that were so critical of other people and sometimes in ourselves are actually mobilizing and oxidizing a lot of fat and a lot of energy. And while this probably won't compensate for chronic overeating, the caloric burn from this is considerable, and very likely can offset a meal that had excessive calories or a kind of steady state of eating too much. And it also starts to open up all sorts of thoughts and discussion about when you travel, you tend to eat foods that are kind of outside your normal ones. We tend to eat foods that aren't so great for us, we also tend to be a little bit more sedentary when we travel we're on the plane, et cetera. But all of that aside, just the use of something like low-level movement. And it's almost like a tremor, but also these select short, small fidgety movements. I'm intentionally doing a lot of these today. So you have examples that you can use to select from if you like. These can have a major effect on fat loss and it raises a second tool. If these low, meaning these small movements that we engage in trigger epinephrin adrenaline release from these neurons of the sympathetic nervous system that innervate fat and increase fat mobilization and oxidation. Now, it should make sense why shivering is one of the strongest stimuli that one can incorporate to stimulate fat loss. Now, shivering is almost always associated with cold. We think shivering, we think cold, because when we get cold, we shiver. And there are two ways that shivering can increase fat loss. And there are several ways that you can use shivering, you can leverage shivering and you can leverage cold to accelerate fat loss. But you have to do it correctly. And most of the people that are using cold and frankly suggesting cold as a means to increase metabolism fat loss are suggesting the exact wrong protocol. In fact, the one I'm going to recommend is 180 degrees in the opposite direction to the typical protocol that you'd hear about. So let's talk about how to use cold and how to leverage shiver as a particularly strong stimulus to increase fat loss through mobilization and oxidation of these fatty acids. So in recent years there's been a growing interest in the use of cold for various things like, improving stress tolerance, improving metabolism, recovery from exercise. I've talked about a number of those things and the uses of cold on this podcast. In fact, did an episode on how to supercharge performance through palmer cooling, cooling the palms in specific ways or the bottoms of the feet. And if you're interested in that, and how to improve performance in endurance and strength, you can check out that episode. But most people out there are using cold exposure typically by taking cold showers or by getting into cold water of some other kind, a lake or a river or a cold bath or an ice bath. And they are doing that probably with mixed goals, meaning they both would like to increase their metabolism and burn fat, as well as improve mental resilience. Since today, we're talking about accelerating fat loss through the use of science-based tools. I want to emphasize a study that was published in nature just a couple of years ago, showing exactly how cold increases metabolism and fat loss. Okay? So we have several kinds of fat. Three kinds in fact. We have white fat, white adipose tissue, and we have brown fat or brown adipose tissue. And there's a third kind which is beige adipose tissue. White fat is the type that we traditionally think of as fat, subcutaneous fat. And it is not particularly rich in mitochondria. It is there as an energy storage site and we have to mobilize the fat out as we talked about before and burn it up elsewhere. Brown fat largely exists between our shoulder blades and on the back of our neck, between the scapulae. And it's rich with mitochondria which is why it's called brown fat. And brown fat has a particular biochemical cascade whereby it can take food energy, it can take food, basically, break it down and convert it into energy within those cells. And there's some additional steps involved, but unlike fatty acids from white fat which have to travel elsewhere get broken down in mitochondria and convert into ATP, et cetera. Used by the mitochondria rather. Brown fat is thermogenic. It can actually use energy directly. It skips a step, and I don't want to get diverted by going into all the biochemistry of it. Beige fat is sort of in between. It's white fat that could be brown fat, because it has some mitochondria in it, but not as many as brown fat. Now, cold exposure does several things. Making ourselves cold can allow us to build up mental resilience because getting into cold of any kind, doesn't matter if it's a cryochamber, doesn't matter if it's a cold day and you forgot your sweater or your parka. It doesn't matter if it's an ice bath or you're lying down in the snow. Cold causes the release of adrenaline from your adrenals. And it causes the release of epinephrin from these neurons that connect to fat. Now, the big effects of cold on metabolism and fat burning are going to be through two routes. One, is that if you expose yourself to cold, you have the opportunity to trigger activation of brown fat as well as to convert more beige fat into true brown fat. So you essentially create a stronger or a hotter furnace. That's the way to think about brown fat. It's like a furnace. And so with this principle that we started with a calories in versus calories burned. What you're doing is you're increasing the amount of burning, you're increasing the burn of energy by increasing the intensity of the heat inside you so to speak. Okay? I'm talking here kind of metaphorically. Now, how can you do that? Well, if you get into cold water or an ice bath or a cold day, and you try and remain calm and resist shivering, you actually short circuit this mechanism for increasing brown fat thermogenesis. The paper published in nature shows that it is shivering itself that causes the brown fat to increase your burning, your burn rate and your metabolism. And it works like this, when you get into cold and you shiver, the shivering that low level movement of the muscle, those small movements triggers the release of a molecule called succinate. S-U-C-C-I-N-A-T-E, succinate. And succinate acts on the brown fat to increase brown fat thermogenesis and fat burning overall. It actually increases body heat through this brown fat thermogenesis pathway. And it also over time can increase the amount of brown fat by converting beige fat into true brown fat. Now, how much cold exposure and how often? That's the key. But before I give that detail or set of details. Remember if you resist the shiver, you are not going to get the increased metabolic effect, because you are not going to get the succinate release. So if you want to get your body heat, your thermogenic level to go up, you need to shiver. So now we have the NEAT, the non-exercise activity thermogenesis. So low levels of activity as I described before, which are done away from cold, maybe do them in cold as well. As well as shiver in response to cold. And so the shiver itself is valuable for triggering the release of succinate. In fact, succinate is being evolved now by various drug manufacturers as a potential treatment for obesity. Although it hasn't really hit the market in its final form yet. Succinate is powerful for its effects on brown fat. So how many times a week do you need to expose yourself to cold? Will depend on how much fat you're trying to lose, and how much you're trying to increase your metabolism. There are studies that describe positive effects on fat loss of exposing yourself to cold, either through cold shower or through ice bath or other cold water. It doesn't have to actually have ice in it, provided it's cold enough for anytime, anywhere, excuse me, between one and five times per week. But it turns out that just one exposure per week can be valuable. The question then is how long to get into that cold environment? And how cold should that environment be? So first let's talk about how long to get into that cold environment? The answer here might be a little bit different than you might imagine. Most of you might think, oh, well if one minute is good, three minutes is better, and if three minutes is better than 10 minutes is best. But remember the goal is to get the shiver induced release of succinate, so that succinate can trigger the brown fat. It turns out that if you want to trigger the shiver, what you want to do is to get into the cold and then get out of the cold and typically not dry off, and then get back into the cold and out of the cold, that will definitely stimulate more shivering than just getting into the cold itself. So what I'm not referring to, is getting into the cold environment like an ice bath and waiting until you shiver and staying there shivering. Okay? You also don't want to get hypothermic. And I want to be clear. You want to get approval from your doctor before you do any of this. When you get into cold water, there are two factors that will dictate whether or not you shiver. Probably three, but let's just talk about the main two. One, is how cold it is. So how cold should it be? And look, if you get into water, that's very, very cold. It can actually shock your heart. It can actually give you a heart attack if it's truly, truly ice cold, and you're not adapted to that. So proceed with caution, please. I'm not a physician and I don't want to see anyone get hurt. Just cold enough to be uncomfortable is a good place to start. So for some of you that's going to be 60 degrees, for some of you that's going to be 55 degrees, for some of you it's going to be high thirties, right? Depends on how cold adapted you are, and people vary in terms of how well they tolerate the cold. So what you need to do is find a temperature that you can get into one to five, probably one to three times a week. If you really want this to accelerate fat loss. And you want to get in until you just start to shiver, and then you want to get out and not dry off, wait anywhere from one to three minutes and then get back into the cold. Now, you'll notice when you get back into the cold, it'll almost seem soothing, it might actually not induce shiv... It might take away the shiver that you had. So here's a potential kind of sets reps protocol that you can play with. Find a temperature then induce a shiver for you. That's going to vary depending on your cold tolerance and how cold adapted you are. One to three, maybe five times a week, get in until you... Or get under the shower or whatever it is, until you start to shiver. Genuinely shiver. Then after about a minute or so, get out, spend one to three minutes out, but don't dry off, get back in for anywhere from one to three minutes, but try and access the shiver point again. And you might do three repetitions of that. So it's three times in and three times out total. Okay? That's a great starting place. And what you don't want to do is build up your tolerance to cold so fast, that pretty soon you're able to resist the shiver, because remember the shiver is the source of the succinate release that will trigger brown fat thermogenesis. So if you'd like to see this protocol spelled out, you can access it zero cost at a website which is www.thecoldplunge.com. The Cold Plunge is a company they make cold plunges, and they were kind enough to gift one to the Human Lab Podcast. But I want to emphasize that these protocols are free of cost. The folks at the Cold Plunge are not just interested in marketing their product, but one of their main interests is encouraging people to engage in cold exposure for particular end points and goals like fat loss, resilience, et cetera. Resisting inflammation. But their main focus is providing people protocols and encouraging people to use cold exposure of various kinds not just through their products, but through cold rivers and jumps in the ocean and things like cold showers, whatever is most convenient and accessible for various people. And so we needed a place where we could house these protocols in a permanent way, and not just for this episode. But so what they've agreed to do is, to post the protocols there, they should be very easy to find on their website. This particular protocol we're referring to as the fat loss optimization protocol for lack of a better name. And it's really grounded in how cold it can be used to induce shiver. And again, it doesn't really matter how you're accessing that cold, provided you access to the shiver, and you're moving from the cold environment to a slightly warmer environment. So getting out of the cold shower or getting out of the ice bath, et cetera, or out of the cold plunge, and then back in. Because it turns out that the cooling and rewarming process of the body is where shiver kicks in. And so that's distinctly different than just trying to get into the cold and stay in the cold for as long as possible. And if you zoom out a little bit and think about some examples in life, you'll understand why that must be the case. For instance, people who do a lot of cold water swims, you have these polar bear clubs, I think they call themselves. They do these cold water swims. I would sometimes see these people swimming back and forth to Alcatraz and stuff like that, which it seems risky. and they tell me it's very stimulating for the mind and body. Great. Sometimes those people are very lean, oftentimes they're not, and they're getting a lot of cold exposure. And one of the things that happens is, if you expose yourself to cold over and over, you adapt, you become cold adapted. And when you do that, you no longer get the epinephrine, the adrenaline release from the cold and therefore you don't get the succinate release and the shivering and the brown fat thermogenic effect quite as intensely. So if you want to use cold for other reasons, and certainly cold water swims can be fun. And there's, you know, long as you can do them safely, they're great. I've gotten into cold water swimming for some period of time. You can use cold for resilience, et cetera. But if you want to use cold to increase fat loss, then getting this shiver process going the cooling and rewarming which accelerates the amount of, or increases the amount of shiver. That's going to be the way to go. One note about cold and some of the factors that it releases. A few years back there was a lot of excitement about this hormone called irisin, I-R-I-S-I-N, which was associated with cold. And there was a lot of excitement about its potential role in increasing metabolism so much so that people were starting to explore this as a potential fat loss drug. To my knowledge that went nowhere. The science eventually shifted over to succinate as the main factor in cold induced thermogenesis through this brown fat pathway. But if anyone out there is aware of any positive effects of iricin or of any signs of irisin that I'm overlooking here, or that I'm speaking about incorrectly, please let me know. I'd be very curious to learn. Now, I want to just talk about brown fat a little bit more, and talk about a period in your life in which you were rich with brown fat, you had a ton of brown fat, and that's when you were a baby. Babies can't shiver. These neurons that release epinephrin into fat are not wired up and really aren't present at sufficient levels or in sufficient numbers when you are a baby. And therefore you can't shiver as a baby, and you can't warm yourself up in cold environments very well. To compensate for that, mother nature installed in all of us an excess of brown fat early in life that exists again in the upper back, and the middle of the back and the back of the neck. Over time if we don't expose ourselves to cold environments or do other things that make a shiver, we lose a lot of that brown fat, but what's interesting about brown fat is that there's some evidence that brown fat just like white fat can both increase in size, but that you can also add new cells. Now, there's a little bit controversial. People always say you can't change the number of fat cells, you can just shrink them or increase their size. Well, it turns out that epinephrin released from these little nerve endings in brown fat and succinate circulating in the body may and I want to underscore may have the effect of increasing the amount of brown fat cells probably by converting these beige fat cells into brown fat. So that allows us to become much as we were early in life, where we metabolized like crazy and we'd heat ourselves up without shivering. Some people have taken the cold thing to the extreme, putting ice packs on the back of their neck throughout the day. Did a episode all about testosterone and estrogen, and there's this, let's just call it a very niche, I have to imagine very, very niche culture of people who are wearing literally, I'm not joking. They are these cool pack ice pack underpants. They go by a name that I'm not going to repeat on here, but you can find them on Amazon. Those are people that are using cold packs on the body and on the groin to try and increase things like testosterone. But as well to try and increase thermogenesis and trying to increase their metabolism. Just remember if you become cold adapted, you're not going to get the fat burning effects to the same degree. So cold is a powerful tool for fat loss, but you don't want to adapt. This is reminiscent of a rule that you hear about in endurance exercise and in strength exercise as well, which is, that you want to use the minimal effective stimulus to promote growth or progress. So growth of a muscle or improvements in endurance. If you go 10% further on a run or 10% faster, you will likely see an improvement in performance provided your recovery the next time you come back and do that same round of exercise. You'll be able to do more work or complete the work more easily, et cetera. You've adapted. If you do 20% more distance or 20% more weight, you won't necessarily see the same commiserate level of gain or improvement. And so likewise with cold, if you're quickly moving from 30 seconds of exposure to 10 minutes of exposure, you're overlooking the opportunity to get the most fat loss and increase in metabolism by stepping it up in smaller increments. Okay? And this also speaks to the rationale for using cold exposure to accelerate fat loss for certain periods, but then maybe not doing it year round. If fat loss is your goal, maybe use it for two, three months at a time and then stop for two, three months at a time, because it is such a potent stimulus provided you engage in the shiver. Next I'd like to move to exercise and how particular timing and types of exercise can vastly improve fat loss. Before I do that, I just want to mention a really important reference for those of you that are interested in learning more about how neurons connect to fat? This is certainly a paper that you'd want to look at, if you're interested in diving deep into the literature and reading all the various studies. It's a review. And the title of the review is neural innervation of white adipose tissue and the control of lipolysis. That's neural innervation of white adipose tissue and the control of lipolysis. It was published in Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology. You can find that free online. They have the full text available. The first author is Bartness, B-A-R-T-N-E-S-S. It's a great review. And I've talked about a number of things that are mentioned in the review. Follow the references in that review and the reference trail as we say, if you're interested in learning more about also how neurons control brown fat. And before I moved to exercise, I also just want to highlight something that comes up every few years and has largely been considered myth now, but that is actually more interesting than most people might think, which is this issue of spot reduction. You know, in the 80s and 90s, there were a lot of commercials, late night infomercials, where they would talk about spot reduction. If you do sit ups, will you lose abdominal fat? If you do hip raises or glute raises, will you lose gluten hip fat. And I think everybody knows now believes that, and understands that fat metabolism is something that happens systemically throughout the body. That some body fat is quote unquote more stubborn than others. Everyone varies in where they tend to store fat or lose fat last. Number of factors that influence that, and in particular hormone receptors. But now at least in the scientific literature, spot reduction and the possibility of real true spot reduction reductions in fat in a targeted way, a body part or body area targeted way is becoming more of a reality and may be a reality soon, because exercise that triggers the activation of these nerve fibers, these neurons that innervate fat. In theory, if you can increase the amount of epinephrin released at those particular fat pads as they're called, they're actually called fat pads in the scientific literature. In theory, you could increase mobilization from those particular body fat sites. Okay? So because the new view that the modern understanding is that it's not adrenaline released systemically kind of bathing all your fat tissue, but rather its neurons releasing adrenaline epinephrin locally that in theory, exercise that stimulates the release of epinephrin or exercise coupled with things like shiver or low grade shaking movement, or the NEAT, the non-exercise activity thermogenesis could in theory lead to local enhancement of mobilization of fat tissue. So I think that spot reduction actually will soon be something that's possible using the appropriate technology. What does this mean for you now? What could you possibly do with this information now? Well, I think it speaks to the fact that if one is going to engage in exercise that doing exercises that involve lots of different body parts and movements is likely to encourage the maintenance and or growth of these neurons that innervate fat throughout the body. What this means is changing up the pattern of exercise, engaging in novel types of movements may actually be one way that one can access these so-called stubborn body fat pads. Now, there's a little bit of speculation in the statement that I'm making, but if you think about it it makes sense. If you become very adapted to a particular pattern of exercise, whether or not you're subcaloric or not, you're on maintenance calories are not, you are oxidizing some fat always, and you're utilizing the neurons that innervate fat in a regular way. And pretty soon this innervation is going to shut off, because there's no reason why this neural innervation of fat should continue to release epinephrin unless you give it a strong stimulus like cold or the fidgeting or in this case to do novel forms of exercise. And there's some anecdotal evidence and I don't even want to call it data, but anecdotal evidence that people who have, quote on quote stubborn body fat, if they start to adopt new patterns of exercise, they can start to access those stubborn fat pads. And again, fat pads is the correct way to refer to these in the scientific literature. So what we're focusing on today is the fact that fat indeed will be mobilized and oxidized in response to a deficit in calories. But that the way that neurons control those fat pads and those body fat stores, affords you a lot more control than perhaps you ever previously thought. So let's talk about movement. And the more traditional kinds of movement, aka exercise has been shown to lead to increases in metabolism and fat loss to greater degrees depending on whether or not for, instance you're fasted when you do it or not, whether or not you do your cardio first or your resistance training first. And this is again in the literature for which there's a lot of controversy, but in digging through all the studies on this, we're finally starting to arrive at a consensus of, when is best to do exercise? And what types of exercise to do if your goal is fat loss? The topic of exercise is a kind of controversial one, not as controversial as nutrition and diet which we will talk about in a few minutes. But it's a particularly interesting one, because different types of exercising gauge the musculature of the body and the heart and the lungs in different ways, and can have vastly different effects on things like hormones and metabolism depending on whether or not it's of high intensity, moderate intensity or low intensity. So rather than think about weight training versus cardiovascular exercise, I think the most simple way, the most fluid way to have this conversation about exercise and fat loss is in terms of three general types of training. Whether or not it's done with weights or body weight doesn't really matter. And those are high intensity interval training. Something that's seems to have gained a lot of popularity in recent years. So-called HITT, H-I-I-T. So high intensity interval training. Sprint interval training. So that's going to be very high intensity or SIT, or moderate intensity continuous training, M-I-C-T. So we've got HIIT, SIT and MICT, M-I-C-T. And we can get a little bit more precise if you'd like. I'm not somebody who measures my VO2 max or anything while I exercise. I generally know whether or not I'm doing something I could continue for a very long time, or whether or not I'm doing something that I realize is going to be of short duration high-intensity. But if you'd like to map this to VO2 max SIT, this sprint interval training was defined as all out greater than 100% of VO2 max bursts of activity that lasts eight to 30 seconds intersperse with less intense recovery periods. So this would be sprinting downfield for eight to 30 seconds, then maybe walking back for about a minute or two and then sprinting again and then continuing. So that would be SIT. HIIT, H-I-I-T is defined as submaximal, so 80 to a hundred percent of VO2 max bursts of activity that lasts 60 to 240 seconds intersperse with less intense recovery periods. So on a standard 400 meter track, just to give this a little bit of a visual, a four minute mile would be fantastic for most people, although people run faster than that of course. So that's four 60 seconds laps, but that's back to back to back. I think in my best shape or maybe it was in my dreams, I don't recall which I was able to do 60 seconds around the track, but of course I couldn't get that on the second or third or fourth if I did that was certainly in the fantasy land and not reality. But 60 seconds would be about one revolution around the track, maybe 90 seconds, depending on how fast a one is running. So 60 to 240 seconds. MICT okay. This moderate intensity continuous training is steady state cardio sometimes called Zone 2 cardio these days on the internet, which has performed continuously for 20 to 60 minutes at moderate intensity of 40 to 60% of VO2 max or if you prefer heart rate 55 to 70% of max heart rate. Okay? So we can think about high, medium and low intensity exercise. Although low intensity usually means that you could carry on a conversation, or maybe you have to gasp every few steps or so, while trying to talk and run. That's I think going to be the most useful way to have this conversation that we're having now, because there's so many different forms of exercise that people do and intensity is important. Let's ask the question that I think many people are wondering about, which is, is it better? Meaning do you burn more fat if you do your exercise fasted? And fasted in this respect could be that you wake up in the morning, you've been fasting all night, you just hydrate and you exercise or sometimes people will ingest caffeine, there's controversy as to whether or not that quote on quote breaks the fast. It has to do with whether or not your caffeine adapted something for another episode. In any case that would be fasted. So probably not having eaten anything for anywhere from three to 24 hours or maybe even more. As you could also be fasted in the afternoon. If you had lunch at noon and it's four or five or 6:00 p.m. Is it, will you burn more fat if you exercise without an eating anything first, without ingesting any calories first? And people have tried to really split hairs on this, every which way people say, well, you can fat fast, because fat and protein doesn't lead to as great increases in insulin as other things, maybe you can have a few almonds and then still train. And indeed insulin will prevent fat oxidation. I want to be really clear. The burning part of fat in the cell, the movement of the fatty acid and into mitochondria and the conversion ATP, insulin inhibits that process. However, it's been shown that it least for short periods of training, it doesn't really seem to matter whether or not you eat before training or you don't, if your goal is fat oxidation. Now, I want to put an asterix near that, because there are some exceptions. But there were several studies done that, and the kind of the classic ones of these, I'll read out to you. What they basically did is they gave people glucose, sugar, to increase their blood sugar before training or not. And the kind of classic study of this is Al Borg at all. So in 1976, so it goes way back, which is that glucose reduces fat burning and exercise. And then some other studies if you want to look these up, they're very easy to find on PubMed. You put in Horowitz 1999, [indistinct] is another one where they have people drink milk with glucose in it. So sweet sugary milk before exercise, et cetera. And you can find a number of examples where eating before exercise reduces the amount of fat that's oxidized during the exercise. And you can also find a lot of studies showing that, eating during exercise or prior to exercise will not reduce the amount of fat that is oxidized. However, the types of exercise whether I was medium intensity or high intensity or low intensity is all over the map for these studies. So it's very hard to target an ideal protocol. And then if you look really deep in the literature, you start to find meta analysis where people have actually aggregated all the findings and some modern studies where it points to some very specific and useful protocols. And so here's the rule that or the protocol that I extracted from that literature. At a period of about 90 minutes of moderate intensity exercise, I want to be clear, at about or after 90 minutes of moderate intensity exercise. There's a switchover point whereby if you ate before the exercise, you will reduce, excuse me, you will burn far less fat from the 90 minute point onward than you would if you had gone into the training fasted. So let me repeat that. If it's moderate intensity, so-called zone two cardio type exercise, at the 90 minute point, if you happen to have eaten before the exercise within one to three hours prior to the exercise, then you reduce the amount of fat that you will burn from 90 minutes onward, whereas if you had fasted prior to the exercise, you hadn't eaten anything for three hours or more prior to the exercise. At the 90 minute point, 90 minutes of exercise you will start to burn more fat than you would had you eaten. Now, 90 minutes of moderate intensity exercises is a lot. So that's a pretty long run. Even if you're running at a pretty slow pace like a 10 or 12 minute mile, that's a lot of running, that's a lot of swimming. So that's a lot of walking, that's a lot of hiking. However, there are people who are going out hiking all day or running all day or walking all day. And if you want to burn more fat per unit time, you want to oxidize more fat then you would do that fasted. Now, there are also studies that pointed the fact that you don't have to wait to 90 minutes in order to get this enhanced fat burning effect. The studies I was able to find and that looked to me like quality peer-reviewed studies with no company bias or no product bias of any kind. These are studies that were largely funded by the federal government in the university context pointed the fact that if one does high-intensity training, or even the very high intensity forms of training like sprints or squats or deadlifts or any kind of activity that can't be maintained for more than these, you know, eight or I would say up to 60 seconds. So a set of lifting weights repeated, repeated, if that's done for anywhere from 20 minutes, so weight training or power lifting or these kinds of things or kettlebell swings or up to 60 minutes, we'll then the switchover point in which you can burn more fat, if you go into that fasted comes earlier. And this makes sense because there's nothing holy about the 90 minute point for a medium intensity Zone 2 cardio. That 90 minute point is the point in which the body shifts over from mainly burning glycogen, basically, sugar that comes from muscles or the liver and realizes this is going on for a while, I'm going to shift over to a storage site fuel that is in reserve like body fat. This is going to happen for a while, so I'm going to start tapping into body fat stores. Now, fat doesn't have a little brain there. It is innervated by neurons, but it doesn't have thoughts. And you don't actually control this switch with your mind. This is something that has to do with the milieu of various hormones. What has to happen is insulin has to go down far enough. So if you ate before the exercise, you'd have an increase in insulin, if you ate carbohydrates you'd have a bigger increase in insulin, fat and proteins indeed you'll have lower amounts of insulin and fasting will give you the lowest amount of insulin. Well, then that switch over point is going to come earlier in the exercise. And if you think about if you were to do something high intensity for 20, 30, 40 minutes, so maybe lift weights and then get into Zone 2 cardio. If you are fasted, the literature says that you're going to burn more body fat per unit time than if you had eaten before or during the exercise. So what does this mean? This means if you want to burn more body fat, if it's in your protocols and you have been approved to do this safely, exercise intensely for 20 to 60 minutes, the higher the intensity obviously the shorter that about is going to be, and then move over into Zone 2 cardio. And if you do that fasted or the medium intensity cardio I should say. And if you do that fasted, then indeed you will burn a higher percentage of body fat. If you need to eat or you like to eat before you train that also can work. And if you train very intensely, you're likely to shift over to the fat burning pattern more quickly as well. So again, this isn't really an issue of how long you exercise. It's an issue of how intensely you exercise and therefore what fuel source you're drawing from. So hopefully I've made that clear, but basically you need to deplete glycogen or through high intensity exercise and then move to a steady state exercise that will allow you to burn more fat. Or you need to perform a medium intensity or low intensity type exercise for a long period of time before you shift over to burning fat. And indeed it seems that going into all that fasted will facilitate the burning of more fat overall. But if you can't even get to the exercise, if you're somebody who just can't do the training at all, you're unwilling to or you're incapable of training, unless you eat something, then obviously eating something makes the most sense. And what you eat prior to exercise, that's a whole other biz that people argue about and fight about whether or not you should go into it with low carbohydrates or higher carbs, all of that. But in general, the theme there is very simple. Which is that you want insulin levels to be pretty low if your goal is body fat reduction, if you want to oxidize body fat. So fasting in some cases, fat fasting and other cases where you're just ingesting fats. Fat and protein, in some cases or for some people it will be eating carbohydrates. I'm not here to dictate a particular nutrition regimen. That's just how the hormone balance of these things and fat oxidation works. Now, one thing that's very interesting and cannot be overlooked is this issue of how much energy you burn during and after the activity. And some of you probably already know about this, but the whole business of calories in versus calories out, and people counting the number of calories they burn during their aerobic session or during their whatever session is only one half of the equation and it really eclipses the more important issue, which is how much of an increase in metabolism does a given exercise create after the exercise? And we could talk for hours about this, but the simple way to view this is that, high intensity training, anaerobic training of weight training, sprints, burpees, any kind of thing. I don't know these days I hear that you're not supposed to do burpees that people think burpees are dangerous. So I'm not suggesting any particular movements here. You have to decide what's right for you. I do burpees. I don't seem to be injured from them, but I hear that they're terrible for some people. So anyway, push-ups, sit-ups, whatever it happens to be that anaerobic exercise that's of higher intensity or sprints taps into glycogen stores during the movement and we'll burn more energy per unit time than moderate intensity. High intensity burns more than modern intensity. That's straightforward. What's interesting is that all the studies that I was able to find on what happens after that type of exercise showed that the percentage of fat that you burn after high intensity exercise is actually greater. In other words, you burn a lot of glycogen during the high intensity exercise. And then after the exercise, the post exercise oxygen consumption as it sometimes called goes up. We know this after you train intensely that post exercise oxygen consumption goes up sometimes for up to 24 hours. And it is during that period of time that you oxidize more fat not glycogen. Now, what's interesting is that the reverse is also true, for people that do long bouts of low or moderate intensity exercise. So typically this would be things like running, swimming, biking, et cetera. So 60, 90 minutes, two hours maybe even people that are training for marathons or half marathons, when they stop training, they burn more glycogen, more carbohydrate, even though they were burning more body fat per unit time during the low intensity exercise. So there's this kind of inversion. High-intensity burns more glycogen during the activity, more body fat afterwards. Moderate to low intensity burns more percentage-wise more body fat is oxidized than glycogen during the actual exercise afterward it's more glycogen. So I don't want this to get too complicated. The point is you should pick exercise that you like, that you're going to do regularly, but it does seem that the high intensity exercise followed by moderate intensity exercise is going to be optimal for fat burning overall. Because when you look at the percentage of body fat burned, and you look at the overall increase in basal metabolic rate, moderate and high intensity training followed by low intensity training or even just followed by going back into life is going to be the best way to continue to burn body fat because of the ways that it increases basal metabolic rate. This could be distilled into a simple protocol whereby three or four times a week you do high intensity training followed by either nothing or followed by low intensity training especially if you're able to do that fasted. And I should just mention that none of this stuff about fasted is about performance. If you want to perform really well, this is for reasons of performance and you want to, you know, it's for a sport or a competition, it's not for body fat purposes. Well, then all of this kind of falls away and is modified by what's ideal to eat for performance. But what we're talking about today is how to optimize body fat loss. So train moderately to very high intensity and then moderate to low intensity, or train moderate to high intensity, and then go about life. And in fact, I have a friend who uses this strategy. He likes the train intensely and not that often protocol cause he's a very busy person. So he'll train for 20 or 30 minutes intensely with weights or just body weight movement doing a lot, he does burpees and push-ups and sit-ups and pull-ups and just kind of moving and kind of circuit type training. But where he's breathing really hard, the goal he always says is, I want to breathe hard for 30 minutes every day. And then afterwards he hydrates and drinks coffee and moves into his day. And he's walking around and taking calls and carrying around his children and doing all these kinds of things that keep him really busy which is kind of like low intensity work. So I think you get the principle now. But you should all be asking yourselves as scientists of yourselves. Why would it be that certain patterns of exercise would lead to more or less fat loss? I mean, it can't just be about the energy burn. We already established that. And again, it has to do with the neurons. It has to do with how we engage the nervous system. So while non-exercise activity induced thermogenesis, NEAT, the fidgeting and cold can induce thermogenesis by engaging shiver tight movement or low-level movements. Big movements that are of very high intensity, meaning they require a lot of effort, deploy a lot of adrenaline epinephrin from our neurons and signal particular types and amounts of fat thermogenesis, fat oxidation, whereas low level intensity exercise, low or moderate intensity exercise, walking, running, biking where you can do that easily, there's not very much adrenaline release. So adrenaline aka epinephrin is really the final common path by which movement of any kind, whether or not it's low level shiver, whether or not it's lifting a barbell sprinting up a hill or doing a long bike ride. Adrenaline is the effector of fat loss. It's the trigger end, it's the effector. So now I want to turn our attention to compounds that increase epinephrin and adrenaline, as well as compounds that work outside the adrenaline epinephrin pathway to increase the rates of fat loss. I almost always save compounds and supplements and things of that sort to the end, because I do believe that people should look first towards behavioral tools and an understanding of the science before they look toward a supplement or a particular thing that they can extract from diet. This is mainly to try and shift people away from the kind of magic pill phenomenon or the idea that there is a magic pill because there really isn't. And frankly, there never will be. But there are some compounds that can greatly increase fat oxidation and mobilization. And understanding which compounds increase oxidation or mobilization can be very useful if your goal is to accelerate fat loss. There are things that people can ingest that will allow them to oxidize more fat. And that occurs mainly by increasing the amount of epinephrin that is released from neurons that innovate fat tissue. One of the more common ones is one that you may already be using which is caffeine. It's well-established that caffeine can enhance performance, if you're caffeine adapted. I talked about this in an earlier episode so I want to make sure I'm very clear about this. If you are not used to drinking caffeine and you suddenly decide I'm going to drink a big cup of coffee before training, you will vasoconstrict and you will limit performance. So that's performance. If you're caffeine adapted however, there's this kind of interesting phenomenon where ingestion of caffeine serves more as a performance enhancer, both by increasing alertness, but also by way of dilating vasculature of allowing more blood flow. Now, caffeine for burning more fat for oxidizing and mobilizing more fat is an interesting one. It can be effective at dosages up to 400 milligrams. You have to be careful if you're caffeine sensitive. Some people have just the littlest bit of caffeine and their mind goes crazy, and they're very uncomfortable. It can have cardiovascular effects for some people or hypertension, et cetera. So please check with your doctor. But 400 milligrams is roughly a cup and a half a coffee or two cups of coffee. Nowadays, there's a lot more caffeine in coffee. So if you go to a typical cafe and you were to get their medium-sized that would have close to a gram of caffeine, which is why, if you're a regular caffeine consumer and you don't get that gram of caffeine in your coffee each day, you will get a headache. It can cause constriction and dilation of blood vessels in ways that's complicated, but you'll get a headache. Some people like the way they feel drinking 100 to 200, 300 maybe 400 milligrams of caffeine before training. And indeed that will lead to increase fat oxidation. It will do that because you will release more epinephrin and adrenaline. So let's just place this in the context of what we said previously. Let's say you normally do Zone 2 cardio, so you're going out for a moderately intense run for 30 to 60 minutes or so. I think the current recommendation guidelines in the States are that people engage in 30 minutes of moderate intensity exercise five days a week for that's 150 minutes. If their goal is to improve or maintain health of the cardiovascular system. 80% of people in the United States fail to do that, or anything close to it. We are way below threshold for what the government has recommended. In this case, the government recommendations, I think are pretty good. That's one could always do better of course. But 80% of people aren't even doing that. However, just using the logic and the understanding of how epinephrin adrenaline is affecting this fat oxidation process. If you were to go out for 15 minutes and you drank caffeine before you went, yes, you'll probably oxidize more fat per unit time. Can you compensate for the exercise you're not doing just by drinking caffeine? Well, probably if you were just talking about fat loss, if that caffeine makes you fidget a lot, right? The amount of calories that you burn in a 30 minute run, unless the run is very intense and you're wearing a weight vest and it's up a hill, it's not that great, right? Then you probably get you in somewhere into the 400, 500 calories burned area. But I said earlier, and there are a lot of data now to support that fidgeting for a day can burn anywhere from 800 to 2,500 calories a day. So you might say, well, fidgeting is better than running, ah, but it doesn't trigger the activation and the positive health effects of the cardiovascular system. So fidgeting alone can be great, but you need exercise for other reasons. Caffeine can enhance the amount of fat that you burn in any duration of exercise. And it can shift the percentage of fat that you oxidize compared to glycogen. Unless you take that caffeine and it ramps you up so much that you're training really, really intensely. The bottom line is, if you like caffeine and you can use it safely, ingesting somewhere between 104 milligrams of caffeine prior to exercise somewhere between 30 to 40 minutes before exercise can be beneficial if we're talking about fat oxidation burning more body fat. So that's caffeine. There are a number of other things that have existed over the years that are in this pathway, things like ephedrine which is now illegal in most states, I think maybe an all states because people were dropping dead from taking ephedrine, because they were heating up too much. It's interesting it wasn't direct effects on the heart causing heart attack. It could trigger by way of adrenergic receptors. If you'd like to know, increases in body temperature and heat. Now, those drugs turned out to be dangerous, because people were overheating and dying. There was also the big Fen-Phen craze. That was a drug that was released fenfluramine which actually was quite effective as an anti obesity drug, a treatment for obesity that had to be outlawed as well. It was FDA approval was removed because again people were dying because of cardiovascular effects. I don't know if people were overheating on it as well. So what is the solution? If caffeine is the kind of the entry point for most people of using compounds to increase the rate or percentage of fat loss in exercise and even at rest, what are some of the other things that are useful and interesting? Well, in terms of tools that are actionable and have reasonable safety margins, I've talked before about something called GLP-1. This is something that can be triggered by the ingestion of yerba mate, which is a tea, and I guess because I'm half Argentine, we grew up drinking mate. I think I was drinking mate from the time I was about three or four years old. I don't suggest that for kids. I don't think kids should be ingesting caffeine. But anyway I did it and I still ingest mate. Mate increases GLP-1. GLP-1 is in the glucagon pathway. So let's just quickly return to our biochemistry. As you recall, fat is mobilized from body fat stores and then it's burned up. It's oxidized in cells. It actually needs to be converted into ATP. And those fatty acids are essentially converted into ATP in the mitochondria of the cell. High insulin prevents that from happening and glucagon facilitates that process. Glucagon facilitates that process through increases in GLP-1. The short takeaway is mate increases GLP-1 and yes, increases the percentage of fat that you will burn. It increases fat burning. And that is especially true, it turns out from the scientific literature, if you ingest mate prior to exercise of any kind. So if you want to burn more fat drinking mate before exercise is good. Drinking it at rest when you're not exercising will also help shift your metabolism toward enhanced burning of fat by increasing fat oxidation. Now, there's a whole category of pharmaceuticals that's being developed right now that are in late stage trials or are in use for the treatment of diabetes which capitalize on this GLP-1 pathway. They go by various names and there are people on the internet who are selling these things. They are prescription drugs and I want to emphasize that they are prescription drugs and you obviously wouldn't want to use any of these without a prescription and a requirement. It does seem that they are effective for the treatment of certain kinds of diabetes and lead to fairly significant weight loss and reduction in appetite. So this is kind of the modern version of GLP-1 is pharmaceuticals of GLP-1 metabolism are drugs such as somatical, I can never pronounce this. I can't seem to pronounce many things it seems. Semaglutide is the way I would pronounce it. S-E-M-A-G-L-U-T-I-D-E. Semaglutide but that's not the way you pronounce it. But Semaglutide is the way that it's been described on the internet. In any case, this compound increases GLP-1. It's actually a GLP-1 analog in some cases, and they go by various types of trade names. So the GLP-1 pathway is interesting. Most people, including myself, are not interested in taking a prescription drug to increase GLP-1, I do it through the ingestion of mate. I just get the mate leaves, pour water over it and drink it. What's kind of interesting, that's not often discussed is that you can increase the amount of GLP-1 by, you can essentially reuse the tea. The first time you drink it it can be very, very intense. And in fact, some people find that mate almost tastes like burnt leaves. It's too intense. You don't want the water to be too hot. But I learned this trick from a friend. You can reuse the leaves over and over again, probably for about a day before they go bad. And in doing that, you start to extract more and more of the compounds from the mate leaf that increased GLP-1. So it's kind of cool. You can kind of get an increased effect. So what I'll typically do is make a about 16 to 30 ounces and just sip it throughout the day, and I do like it before I train. Some people who don't like mate might prefer something like guayusa, which is spelled G-U-A-Y-U-S-A. G-U-A-Y-U-S-A, guayusa which is from Ecuador, despite the USA ending to it. It's from Ecuador. And it's a sweeter tasting tea. It doesn't have any sweetener in it, but the leaf of the guayusa plant is sweeter than the mate plant. I sometimes will mix the two and then make the tea with that. There's no mate or guayusa sponsor of the podcast. These are just tools to increase GLP-1 and fat oxidation. And again, the Semaglutide is the prescription version of the that's kind of the heavy artillery GLP-1 stimulant, and again should be only explored with a prescription. So those are the compounds that really increase fat oxidation directly. There are going to be a number of things that impact insulin and glucagon that are going to shift the body toward more fat burning. We talked about a lot of these during the episode on hormones. We talked about it. We did a whole episode on hormones and metabolism. And so for instance, berberine, which comes from a plant or metformin are compounds that are now in kind of growing use for reducing blood glucose. They are very potent at reducing blood glucose, which will reduce insulin because the job of the hormone insulin is to essentially manage glucose in the bloodstream. So there are a huge gallery of compounds that will reduce insulin and thereby can increase fat oxidation. And that's because, as I mentioned before, fat oxidation, this conversion of fatty acids into ATP in the mitochondria is inhibited by insulin. So if you keep insulin low, you're going to increase that process. Which brings us full circle back to the issue of diet and nutrition. There is really solid evidence from the Gardner Lab at Stanford and from other labs showing that, when you look at different diets, you look at low fat diets, high fat diets, keto diets, intermittent fasting, provided people stick to their particular diet, it doesn't really matter which diet you follow. You can still get a caloric deficit and you get weight loss. Adherence however is always an issue. And so what I always say is, that you want to use the eating plan that is obviously beneficial to your health, but the one that allows you to adhere to whatever it is that the particular nutrition protocol is, right? If you can't stick with something, then it's not very worthwhile. But from the purely scientific standpoint, there's also an advantage to keeping insulin low. Now, that doesn't necessarily mean you go to zero carbohydrate. I've talked before about my preferred way of eating is to go lower or no carbohydrates throughout the day for alertness to get that adrenaline release and the focus that goes with it, et cetera, and the ability to think and move and do all the things I need to do during the day. And then I eat carbohydrates at night 'cause it facilitates the transition to sleep. That's what works for me. But when insulin is low, you do place your system in a position to oxidize more fat. And so that's why I think a lot of people do see benefit from lower carbohydrate or moderate carbohydrate diets, because when insulin is low, you are in a position to oxidize more fat. Both from exercise and at rest. And I should mention, because I often mention and it's appropriate to mention that if you're interested in looking at the effects of caffeine, of mate, guayusa things of that sort, GLP-1 you want to learn more about those. You can go to this wonderful website which is free www.examine.com. You can put in yerba mate, it will describe the three studies that show increased fat oxidation, both during exercise and at rest, and as a consequence not surprisingly and increase in metabolic rate. One thing that's interesting about mate is it causes a slight decrease in heart rate for reasons that still escape me. There's a single study showing that heart rate is slightly reduced which is kind of nice because if, when I drink too much caffeine my heart rate goes up, maybe that would increase my fidgeting and my fat burning, but I don't like the feeling of having my basal heart rate being up too high. I like my heart rate elevate during exercise, but not when I'm just kind of resting or working and throughout the day. And for some reason that I don't understand there's an effect of mate of increasing fat oxidation but reducing heart rate just slightly. So that's interesting. And it probably lends itself [indistinct] explains the subjective experience that I've had of that mate has kind of a little nice even mellow stimulant. It's not this really supercharged stimulant like caffeine from coffee or other sources. Although if you drink too much mate it will also make you jittery. And there's one more compound that I think we should discuss in terms of increasing fat loss, and that's carnitine or acetyl-L-carnitine, they lie in the same pathway. We can return to our basic knowledge now of fat mobilization and oxidation. After fat is mobilized and makes it into cells and needs to be oxidized. So the literally the burning of fat and conversion of it into energy that is accomplished and is facilitated by the presence of glucagon being elevated, GLP increases that process and insulin being low. And we talked about some ways to manage insulin both in this episode and in previous episode. L-carnitine and acetyl-L-carnitine in particular facilitates fat oxidation. It helps convert fatty acids into ATP. And indeed supplementing L-carnitine can increase fat loss. That's been shown. At what dosages? Well, people ingest anywhere from 500 milligrams to two grams per day in divided doses typically. Some people who are really extreme are taking injectable L-carnitine, I've certainly not tried that. I confess I have used it in pill form from time to time but in part, because of the fat oxidation effects, but also because of the other effects that it tends to have. So in exploring the effects that acetyl-L-carnitine has, it has a huge variety of effects on cellar metabolism. It can reduce ammonia in the blood that is actually a quite strong effect. It can reduce things like C-reactive protein, which is you want to C-reactive protein levels to be managed. You do not want them too high. Can slightly reduce blood glucose. I can slightly increase HDLC, the good form of the blood lipid and slightly reduce overall cholesterol. And as I mentioned, it can slightly modify the pathway involving glucagon, such that you get a considerable effect, not a huge effect on fat oxidation, so it can improve pat oxidation rates. It has a number of other effects, some of which I talked during the month on hormones and that sort of thing. It has strong effects on rates of pregnancy and sperm quality. So clearly carnitine is doing lots of different things and lots of different cells. It's impacting sperm motility. They're in a large number of studies supporting that. Slight reductions in blood pressure and has these interesting effects on reducing fatigue during exercise, reducing inflammatory markers like interleukin 6. So it has a number of effects that on the whole are quote unquote positive or at least in the direction of things that you may want. And I should emphasize may. You certainly don't need a acetyl-L-carnitine in order to lose fat, but now that you understand the cellular process by which fat is mobilized and oxidized, it should make sense that if L-carnitine is important for converting fatty acids into energy, then supplementing L-carnitine make sense. Acetyl-L-carnitine is the type of L-carnitine or the form of L-carnitine I should say, that is transported and utilized most easily by the body. And so that's why sometimes we distinguish between L-carnitine and acetyl-L-carnitine. So once again, we've covered an enormous amount of material. We've talked about the science of fat loss and in particular, we've explored this topic from the perspective of the nervous system. How neurons and in particular the release of things like adrenaline, epinephrin can facilitate fat mobilization and oxidation. We talked about NEAT, fidgeting, this non-exercise type movement that can greatly increase caloric burn. And why that is. We talked about shiver, another form of non-exercise movement that can really increase both caloric expenditure due to the shiver, due to the movement, as well as increase thermogenesis the heating up of the body through things like brown fat, and even the conversion of white fat to brown fat which is a good thing if you want to oxidize fat. We talked about cold as a particular stimulus to induce shiver and how to use getting into, an out of cold as a way to stimulate shiver and avoid cold adaptation so that you continue to oxidize and burn fat, if that's your goal. If you want to check out the protocols for that, there at www.thecoldplunge.com and in weeks to come we're going to be adding more protocols to that website not just for fat loss, but for things like resilience, reducing inflammation, et cetera. So be sure to check those out again, those are totally cost-free. Talked about exercise. How rather than thinking about cardiovascular or weight training exercise, that we should perhaps look through the lens of this adrenaline system and how it interacts with fat stores and think about low, medium or high intensity exercise. Whether or not we show up to that fasted or not. Turns out showing up to that fasted can be useful, if you start with high intensity movements and then move into lower intensity type exercise. If you're going to go long duration, it probably doesn't matter unless you're exercising longer than 90 minutes, whether or not you eat or not. We talked about caffeine as a stimulant and a stimulus for epinephrin and adrenaline release as a way to access more fat metabolism. And we talked about compounds that come from things like yerba mate and guayusa tea, this GLP-1 pathway that can trigger increased fat oxidation so much so that the pharmaceutical companies are now developing compounds specifically to increase GLP-1 for treatment of diabetes and obesity. But you can leverage the GLP-1 pathway through the ingestion of things like mate or guayusa if that's of interest to you. And then we talked about L-carnitine and how L-carnitine itself is critical for the fat oxidation within individual cells. The conversion of fatty acids to energy. And why having your insulin low and things like L-carnitine and glucagon levels high or sufficient at least can facilitate the burning of fat, fat oxidation. So we covered a lot of material. That's a lot of protocols I realize that didn't... The little list I just gave right there didn't even begin to get into all the details and corners that we discussed. I hope you found this conversation interesting both for sake of understanding fat loss and how to lose fat more quickly and to lose more of it, if that's your goal. As well as simply to understand the biology of fat metabolism from a different perspective, from the perspective of the nervous system. If you're enjoying this podcast and you're benefiting from the information that you're learning, please subscribe on YouTube. That really helps us a lot. There's also a notifications button that you can hit that will notify you anytime we release new content. We release new episodes every Monday, but sometimes we release additional material in between. So please do subscribe on YouTube. As well if you could subscribe on Apple and or Spotify that's terrific and really helps us. And at Apple, you can give us a five star review. If you think we deserve a five-star review. As well as you have the opportunity to give us feedback at Apple. The comment section on YouTube is the place to give us feedback whether or not you like an episode, whether or not you don't like an episode. Aspects that you particularly liked, suggestions for future content. We do read, I do read through all the comments. It takes me some time. I sometimes fall a little bit behind depending on other duties, but I read all the comments and I do take them into account when developing this material and the structure of the material. So please do provide feedback in the comment section. We really appreciate it. Other ways to support the podcast are to check out the sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning of the podcast. That's a terrific way to support us. As well we have a Patreon. It's www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And at Patreon that will allow you to support the podcast at any level that you like. I've mentioned supplements during the podcast. If you're interested in taking supplements, you might want to check out Thorne. T-H-O-R-N-E. We've partnered with Thorne because they have the highest levels of stringency in terms of the quality of the ingredients they use, and the amounts of the ingredients that they use. If you want to see the supplements that I take, you can go to Thorne, thorne.com/u/huberman. And you can get 20% off any of the supplements that are there, as well as any of the supplements that Thorne makes. That's thorne.com/u/huberman to get 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne makes. And last but not least, I want to thank you for your time and attention today. And thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 327 ---
Video ID: xJ0IBzCjEPk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xJ0IBzCjEPk
Title: How to Learn Skills Faster
Published: 2021-05-17 12:00:20 UTC
Description:
This episode I discuss the science and practice of learning physical skills: what it involves at a biological level, and what to focus on during skill learning at each stage to maximize learning speed and depth. I also describe what to do immediately after a training session (note: this is different than the optimal protocol for cognitive skill training) and as you progress to more advanced levels of performance. I also cover the science of skill-based visualization which does have benefits, but only if done correctly and at the correct times. I discuss auto-replay of skill learning in the brain during sleep and the value of adding in post-training ‘deliberately idle’ sessions. I cover how to immediately improve limb-range-of-motion by leveraging cerebellum function, error generation, optimal repetition numbers for learning and more. As always, scientific mechanism, peer-reviewed studies and science-based protocols are discussed. 

Thank you to our sponsors
InsideTracker - https://insidetracker.com/huberman
Athletic Greens - https://athleticgreens.com/huberman

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab

Website: https://hubermanlab.com
Join the Neural Network: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introduction  
00:06:28 Skill Acquisition: Mental & Physical 
00:08:40 Clarification About Cold, Heat & Caffeine  
00:12:45 Tool: How To Quickly Eliminate the Side-Stitch ‘Cramp’ & Boost HRV Entrainment 
00:16:08 Physical Skills: Open-Loop Versus Closed-Loop 
00:18:50 Three Key Components To Any Skill 
00:21:00 Sources of Control for Movement: 1) CPGs Govern Rhythmic Learned Behavior 
00:23:30 Upper Motor Neurons for Deliberate Movement & Learning 
00:25:00 Lower Motor Neurons Control Action Execution 
00:25:26 What To Focus On While Learning 
00:27:10 The Reality of Skill Learning & the 10,000 Hours Myth 
00:28:30 Repetitions & The Super Mario Effect: Error Signals vs. Error Signals + Punishment 
00:34:00 Learning To Win, Every Time  
00:39:26 Errors Solve the Problem of What Focus On While Trying to Learn Skills  
00:43:00 Why Increasing Baseline Levels of Dopamine Prior To Learning Is Bad 
00:44:40 The Framing Effect (& Protocol Defined) 
00:46:10 A Note & Warning To Coaches   
00:48:30 What To Do Immediately After Your Physical Skill Learning Practice 
00:53:48 Leveraging Uncertainty  
00:56:59 What to Pay Attention To While Striving To Improve 
01:04:45 Protocol Synthesis Part One 
01:07:10 Super-Slow-Motion Learning Training: Only Useful After Some Proficiency Is Attained 
01:11:06 How To Move From Intermediate To Advanced Skill Execution faster: Metronomes 
01:16:44 Increasing Speed Even If It Means More Errors: Training Central Pattern Generators 
01:19:12 Integrated Learning: Leveraging Your Cerebellum (“Mini-Brain”) 
01:22:02 Protocol For Increasing Limb Range of Motion, Immediately 
01:28:30 Visualization/ Mental Rehearsal: How To Do It Correctly 
01:33:50 Results From 15 Minutes Per Day, 5 Days Per Week Visualization (vs. Actual Training) 
01:35:34 Imagining Something Is Very Different Than Actually Experiencing It 
01:37:58 Cadence Training & Learning “Carryover” 
01:39:00 Ingestible Compounds That Support Skill Learning: Motivation, Repetitions, Alpha-GPC 
01:43:39 Summary & Sequencing Tools: Reps, Fails, Idle Time, Sleep, Metronome, Visualization 
01:46:20 Density Training: Comparing Ultradian- & Non-Ultradian Training Sessions 
01:49:24 Cost-Free Ways to Support Us, Sponsors & Alternate Channels, Closing Remarks 

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [instrumental music] - I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Belcampo Meat Company. Belcampo Meat Company is a regenerative farm in Northern California that raises organic grass fed and grass-finished certified humane meats. I eat meat about once a day. I'm neither pure carnivore, nor am I a vegetarian. Obviously I eat meat. The way I eat is I tend to fast until about noon and then I have my first meal which generally consists of a piece of beef. It's either ground beef or a steak. I like ribeyes, I like flat irons, these kinds of things and a small salad, sometimes a large salad. And then throughout the day, I generally am low carb until the evening when I eat pasta and rice and things of that sort. Eating that way is what optimizes my levels of alertness and optimizes my sleep. I've talked about this on previous podcast episodes, Now, because I eat meat essentially every day, the source of that meat is extremely important to me. I want it to be healthy for me and I want the animals that it comes from to be healthy and to have lived a good life. Conventionally raised animals are confined to feedlots and they eat a diet of inflammatory grains, which is terrible for them and it's terrible for us when we eat those meats. Belcampo's animals graze on open pastures and seasonal grasses, which results in meat that is higher in nutrients and healthy fats. They actually have very high levels of Omega threes which I've also talked about on this podcast, are important for mental and physical health for a variety of reasons. The way Belcampo raises its animals is also good for the environment. They practice regenerative agriculture, which means it's climate positive and carbon negative which translates to good for us and good for the planet. You can order Belcampo sustainably raised meats to be delivered straight to your door using my code Huberman by going to belcampo.com/huberman and you'll get 20% off your first time order. That's belcampo.com/huberman for 20% off. Today's podcast is also brought to us by InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting blood work done for the simple reason that many, if not most of the factors that impact our immediate and longterm health can only be assessed from a blood test. And now with the advent of modern DNA tests, we can get additional information about our current health status and our health trajectory. One of major problems with blood tests and DNA tests available for most sources is that you get the numbers back and you can easily see whether or not those numbers are within the standard range or outside the range. But it's very hard to know what to do with that information. Also what the various factors are that are being measured is often very cryptic. With InsideTracker, they clarify everything. They make it very clear and simple as to what each of those factors relates to, so they give you some understanding of what those are and they give you ideas and suggestions about things that you can do with your lifestyle, changes to your diet, changes to your supplementation, changes to your sleep schedule or exercise patterns that can serve to optimize the levels of those various factors and your DNA. In addition, they have something called the inner age test which compares your chronological age which you already know with your biological age which gives you a sense of your lifespan or predicted lifespan. So that's crucially important, and you can imagine why many people, including me would want that information. If you'd like to try InsideTracker you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman and you'll get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Use the code Huberman at checkout, that's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans and use the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I've been using Athletic Greens for well over a decade now. I started using Athletic Greens and I still use Athletic Greens because I find it rather dizzying to know which vitamins and minerals to take. And with Athletic Greens, I cover all my bases of vitamins and minerals. In addition, it has probiotics and we now know from an enormous number of quality peer reviewed studies that the gut microbiome is critically important for our immune system function, for the gut brain access and for our mental functions and probiotics are one way to support the gut brain axis and the gut health generally. With Athletic Greens, I basically just add water, put in a little bit of lemon juice 'cause that's the way I like it. Mix it up, it tastes delicious. I'll do that once or twice a day. It's compatible with fasting at least for me, it doesn't take me out of a fasting mode which I do early in the day. So most often I'll have my Athletic Greens early in the day. And then sometimes I'll also have another one late in the evening, or sometimes even before bed. I'm able to sleep after drinking it without a problem. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman. And if you do that, you can claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs, which are these little packs that make it very easy to mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road or in the car or on a plane. It makes all of that very simple. And in addition, they will give you a year supply of vitamin D3 K2. There are also a lot of data supporting the fact that vitamin D3 is critical for a variety of health metrics. We all know that we can get vitamin D3 from the sun, but many people including me were not getting enough sunlight or D3 even if I was getting a lot of sunlight. I know that 'cause I had my blood levels measured of D3. So I use vitamin D3 every day in addition to the other things I take, including Athletic Greens. If you go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, you'll get the Athletic Greens, the five free travel packs and a year supply of the vitamin D3 and K2, That's athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim the special offer. This month on the Huberman Lab Podcast, we're talking all about physical performance. So that means athletic performance, recreational exercise, weightlifting, running, swimming, yoga, skills and skill learning. Today, we're going to talk about and focus on skill learning. We are going to focus on how to learn skills more quickly in particular motor skills. This will also translate to things like musical skills and playing instruments, but we're mainly going to focus on physical movements of the body that extend beyond the hands like just playing the piano or the fingers like playing the guitar. But everything we're going to talk about will also serve the formation and the consolidation and the performance of other types of skills. So if you're interested in how to perform better, whether or not it's dance or yoga or even something that's just very repetitive like running or swimming, this podcast episode is for you. We're going to go deep into the science of skill learning. And we are going to talk about very specific protocols that the science points to and has verified, allow you to learn more quickly to embed that learning so that you remember it and to be able to build up skills more quickly than you would otherwise. We are also going to touch on a few things that I get asked about a lot, but fortunately recently I've had the time to go deep into the literature, extract the data for you and that's mental visualization. How does visualizing a particular skill or practice serve the learning and or the consolidation of that practice. It turns out there are some absolutely striking protocols that one can use, striking meaning they allow you to learn faster and they allow you to remember how to do things more quickly and better than if you were not doing this mental rehearsal. But the pattern of mental rehearsal and when you do that mental rehearsal turns out to be vitally important. So I'm excited for today's episode. We're going to share a lot of information with you and they're going to be a lot of very simple takeaways. So let's get started. Before we get into the topic of skill learning and tools for accelerating skill learning, I want to briefly revisit the topic of temperature which was covered in the last episode and just highlight a few things and clear up some misunderstandings. So last episode talked about these incredible data from my colleague, Craig Heller's lab at Stanford. He's in the department of biology, showing that cooling the palms in particular ways and at particular times can allow athletes or just recreational exercisers to do more pull-ups, dips, bench presses per unit time, to run further, to cycle further and to feel better doing it. There really are incredible data that are anchored in the biology of the vascular system, the blood supply and how it's involved in cooling us. Many of you, dozens of you in fact said, "Wait a second, you gave us a protocol in this episode "which says that we should cool our palms periodically "throughout exercise in order to be able to do more work. "But on the episode, before that on growth hormone "and thyroid hormone, you said that heating up the body "is good for release of growth hormone." And I just want to clarify that both things are true. These are two separate protocols. You should always warm up before you exercise. That warmup will not increase your body temperature or the muscle temperature to the point where it's going to diminish your work capacity, that it's going to harm your performance. The cooling of the palms, which is really just a route to cool your core in an efficient way, the most efficient way, in fact is about improving performance. Heating up the body with exercise and focusing on heat increases or using sauna for heat increases is geared toward growth hormone release, which is a separate matter. So you can do both of these protocols but you would want to do them at separate times. So just to make this very concrete before I move on to today's topic. If you're interested in doing more work, being able to do more sets and reps per unit time and feel better doing it or to run further or to cycle further, then cooling the palms periodically as I described in the previous episode is going to be the way to go. If you're interested in getting growth hormone release, well then hot sauna. And I offered some other tools if you don't have a sauna in the episode on growth hormone and thyroid hormone is going to be the way to go. So those are separate protocols. You can include them in your fitness regime and your training regime, but you do want to do them at separate times. And as a last point about this, I also mentioned that caffeine can either help or hinder performance depending on whether or not you're caffeine adapted because of the ways that caffeine impacts body temperature and all sorts of things like vasodilation and constriction. It's very simple. If you enjoy caffeine before your workouts and you're accustomed to caffeine, meaning you drink it three or five times or more a week. 100 to 300 milligrams this is a typical daily dose of caffeine. Some of you are ingesting more, some less. If you do that regularly, well, then it's going to be just fine to ingest caffeine before you train. It's not going to impact your body temperature and your vasodilation or constriction in ways that will hinder you. However, if you're not a regular caffeine user and you're thinking, "Oh, I'm going to drink a cup of coffee "and get this huge performance enhancing effect." Well, that's not going to happen. Chances are it's going to lead to increases in body temperature and changes in the way that blood flow is happening in your body, and in particular on these palmer surfaces and in your face that is going to likely diminish performance. So if you enjoy caffeine and you're accustomed to it, so-called caffeine adapted, enjoy it before your training. If you regularly, excuse me, if you do not regularly use caffeine, then you probably do not want to view caffeine as a performance enhancing tool. And while we're on the topic of tools and because this is a month on athletic performance and exercise and physical skill learning, I want to offer an additional tool that I've certainly found useful, which is how to relieve the so-called side stitch or side cramp when running or swimming. This actually relates to respiration and to the nervous system and it is not a cramp. If you've ever been out running and you felt like you had a pain on your side, that pain could be any number of things, but what feels like cramping of your side is actually due to what's called collateralization of the phrenic nerve which is a lot harder to say than a side cramp or a side stitch. But here's the situation. You have a set of nerves, which is called the phrenic nerve P-H-R-E-N-I-C. The phrenic nerve, which extends down from your brainstem essentially, this region to your diaphragm to control your breathing. It has a collateral, meaning it has a branch just like the branch on a tree that innovates your liver. And if you are not breathing deeply enough, what can happen is you can get what's called sometimes a referenced pain. Reference pain is probably going to be familiar to any of you have ever read about how to recognize heart attack. People have heart attacks will sometimes have pain on one side of their body, the left arm, sometimes people that have pain in a part of their back or suddenly also get pain in their shoulder or part of their face. This has to do with the fact that many of our nerves branch, meaning they're collateralized to different organs and areas of the body. And the way those nerves are woven together, it's often the case that if we disrupt the pattern of firing of electrical activity in one of those nerve branches that the other ones are affected too. The side stitch, the pain in your side as often because of the contractions of the diaphragm because of the way you're breathing while you're exercising, running, or swimming or biking. And as a consequence, you feel pain in your side but that's not a cramp. The way to relieve it is very simple. You do the physiological side that I've talked about in previous episodes of the podcast and elsewhere which has a double inhale through the nose, very deep and then a long exhale. And you might want to repeat that two or three times. Typically that will relieve the side stitch because of the way that it changes the firing patterns of the phrenic nerve. So the side stitch is annoying, it's painful, sometimes we think we're dehydrated and you might be dehydrated. But oftentimes it's just that we're breathing in a way that causes some referenced pain of the liver. We call it a side stitch or a side cramp, and you can relieve it very easily through the double inhale, long exhale. That pattern done two or three times, often you can continue to engage in the exercise while you do the double inhale exhale, and it will just relieve itself that way. So give it a try if you experience the side stitch. Some people I know are also doing the double inhale, long exhale during long continuous bouts of exercise. I actually do this when I run. We have decent data although these are still unpublished data that that can engage a kind of regular cadence of heart rate variability. So there are a number of reasons why this physiological side can be useful, but it certainly can be useful for relieving the side stitch or so-called side cramp. Let's talk about the acquisition of new skills. These could be skills such as a golf swing or a tennis swing or you're shooting free throws or you're learning to dance or you're learning an instrument. I'm mainly going to focus on athletic performance. There are basically two types of skills. Open loop and closed loop. Open loop skills are skills where you perform some sort of motor action and then you wait and you get immediate feedback as to whether or not it was done correctly or not. A good example will be throwing darts at a dartboard. So if you throw the dart, you get feedback about whether or not you hit the bullseye, you're off the dart board, or you're some other location on the dart board, that's open loop. Closed loop would be something that's more continuous. So let's say you're a runner and you're starting to do some speed work and some sprints. And you're running and you can kind of feel whether or not you're running correctly, or maybe even have a coach and they're correcting your stride or you're trying to do some sort of skill, like a hopscotch skill, which maybe you're doing the ladder work where you're stepping between designated spaces on the ground. That's closed loop because as you go, you can adjust your behavior and you can adjust the distance of your steps, or you can adjust your speed or you can adjust your posture and you are able to essentially do more practice per unit time but you're getting feedback on a moment to moment basis. So you have open loop and closed loop. And just to make this very clear, open loop would be practicing your tennis serve. So let's say that you set a target on the other side of the net. You throw the ball up and you hit the ball, it goes over that's open-loop. You'll know whether or not you were in the court, you were on the location you wanted to hit or close to it or not, that's open loop. Closed loop would be if you're in a regular can. So maybe you're learning a swim stroke, or maybe you're trying to learn a particular rhythm on the drum. So maybe you're trying to learn a particular beat. I'm not very musical, so I'm not going to embarrass myself by giving an example of this, although later I will, where you're trying to get a particular rhythm down. And if you're not getting it, you can adjust in real time and try and catch up or slow down or speed up, et cetera. So hopefully you'll understand open loop and closed loop. You should always know before you try and learn a skill, whether or not it's open loop or closed loop and I'll return to why that's important shortly. But if you want to learn something, ask is it open loop or closed loop. There are essentially three components of any skill that involves motor movement. And those are sensory perception, actually perceiving what you are doing and what's happening around you. So what you see, what you hear, sometimes you're paying attention to what you're doing specifically like the trajectory of your arm or how you're moving your feet. If you're learning to dance, sometimes you're more focused on something that's happening outside of you, like you're listening for something in music or you're paying attention to the way your partner is moving, et cetera. So there's sensory input. Then there are the actual movements. So they're the movements of your limbs and body. And then there's something called proprioception and proprioception is often discussed as kind of a sixth sense of knowing where your limbs are in relation to your body. So proprioception is vitally important. If I reached down and pick up this pen and pick it up, I'm not thinking about where the pen in my hand is relative to my body, but proprioceptively, I'm aware of it at kind of a six sense deeper subconscious level. I can also make myself aware of where my limbs are. And typically when we learn, we are placing more focus on proprioception than we do ordinarily. So if I get up from this chair and I happen to walk out of the room, I don't think about where my feet are landing relative to one another. But if my leg had fallen asleep because I had been leaning on one of the nerves of my leg or something like that, and my leg feels all tingly or numb. I and you, if this were to happen to you, would immediately notice a shift in gait. It would feel strange, I'd have to pay attention to how I'm stepping. And the reason is I'm not getting any proprioceptive feedback. Now, skill learning has a lot of other dimensions too, but those are the main ones that we're going to focus on. So just to remind you, you need to know open loop or closed loop and you need to know whether or not, excuse me, you need to know that there's sensory perception what you're paying attention to, movements themselves and proprioception. And there's one other important thing that you need to know which is that movement of any kind is generated from one, two or three sources within your nervous system, within your brain and body. These are central pattern generators which are sometimes called CSPGs, excuse me, CPGSs, CSPGs are something entirely different in biology. CPGSs, this just goes to show that I have a module. CSPGs are chondroid and sulfate proteoglycans. They have nothing to do with this topic. CPGSs are central pattern generators or CPGs, they're sometimes called. These CPGs are in your spinal cord, mine and yours, different ones and they generate repetitive movements. So if you're walking, if you're running, if you're cycling, if you're breathing, which presumably you are and you're doing that in a regular rhythmic cadence, central pattern generators are controlling that movement. After you learn how to walk, run, swim, cycle, do anything really, much of the work is handed off to the central pattern generators. And there were experiments that were done in the 60s, 70s and 80s that actually looked at decerebrate animals and even decerebrate humans. These are humans and animals that lack a cerebral cortex. They lack much of the brain and yet they can engage in what's called a fictive movement. So it sounds like a kind of barbaric experiment. I'm glad I wasn't the one to have to do them but this is the stuff of neuroscience textbooks that cats or dogs or mice that have their neocortex removed put them on a treadmill, they'll walk just fine. And they will adjust their speed of walking just fine even though they basically lack all their thinking and decision-making brain. And it turns out humans that have, unfortunately, massive strokes to their cortex and lack any neocortex but preserve the central pattern generators will also walk just fine, even though they lack any of the other stuff in the brain. So these CPGs or CPGSs are amazing, and they control a lot of our already learned behavior. When you're really good at something, CPGs are controlling a lot of that behavior. And that's true also for a golf swing. Even if it's not really repetitive, somebody who's really good at golf it's going to, I guess you call it a T. You put the ball on the T. I show with my knowledge of golf. I've only done mini golf, frankly, but someday maybe I'll learn how to golf, but you set the golf ball down and swing, set the golf ball down, swing. Central pattern generators are going to handle a lot of that. If I were to go to the golf course. Stanford has a beautiful golf course. If I were to go out there and put a ball on the T, my central pattern generators would not be involved in that at all. The moment I bring the club back to swing, it's going to engage other things. And the other things that's going to engage because I don't know that behavior now or then is upper motor neurons. We have motor neurons in our cortex, in our neocortex that control deliberate action. And those are the ones that you're engaging when you are learning. Those are the ones that you have to pay attention in order to engage. And that's what's happening, for instance, if I decide I'm going to reach down and pick up my pen, which I rarely think about, but now I'm thinking about it and I'm going to do this in a very deliberate way. I'm going to grab with these two fingers and lift. My upper motor neurons are now involved. So upper motor neurons are very important because a little bit later in the episode when we talk about how to use visualization in order to accelerate skill learning, it's going to leverage these upper motor neurons in very particular ways. So we have CPGs for rhythmic movement, upper motor neurons for deliberate unlearned movements or movements that we are in the process of learning. And then we have what are called lower motor neurons. Lower motor neurons are the ones in our spinal cord that send little wires out to our muscles which actually caused the firing of those muscle fibers. So the way to think about this as you've got upper motor neurons which talk to CPGs and the lower motor neurons. So it's really simple. And now, you know most everything there is to know about the neural pathways controlling movement, at least for sake of this discussion. So anytime we learn something, we have to decide what to place our sensory perception on, meaning what are we going to focus on. That's critical if you're listening to this and you're the type of person who likes taking notes, this should be the second question you ask. Remember the first question is, is it open loop or closed loop? The second question should be, what should I focus my attention on, auditory attention, visual attention or proprioception. Should I focus on where my limbs are relative to my body or should I focus on the outcome? This is a critical distinction. You can decide to learn how to do a golf swing or learn how to shoot free throws or learn how to dance tango and decide that you are going to focus on the movements of your partner or the positions of your feet. You maybe are going to look at them, maybe you're going to sense them. You're going to actually feel where they are, or maybe you're going to sense the position and posture of your body, which is more proprioception. So you have to allocate your attention. And I'm going to tell you how to allocate your attention best in order to learn faster. So these are the sorts of decisions that you have to make. Fortunately for you, you don't have to think about whether or not you're going to use your upper motor neurons and your lower motor neurons or not, because if you don't know how to do something, you're automatically going to engage your upper motor neurons. And if you do, then you're not going to use your upper motor neurons. You're mainly going to rely on central pattern generators. You are always using your lower motor neurons to move muscle. So we can really simplify things now. I've given you a lot of information but we can simplify it. Basically open loop or closed loop, that's one question and what am I going to focus on? And then your neurology will take care of the rest. So now I want to talk about realistic expectations. Somewhere in Hollywood presumably, it got embedded in somebody's mind that instant skill acquisition was possible, that you could take a particular pill or you could touch a particular object or you could have a wand wave over you and you would suddenly have a skill. And so that is the result of Hollywood at all. It doesn't exist, at least not in reality. And I love movies, but it simply doesn't exist. Then the self-help literature created another rule called the 10,000 hours rule. And frankly, that doesn't really match the literature, at least the scientific literature either. I like it because it implies that learning takes time, which is more accurate than the Hollywood at all instant skill acquisition rule, which isn't really a rule, it's a myth. But the 10,000 hours rule overlook something crucial, which is that it's not about hours, it's about repetitions. Now, of course there's a relationship between time and repetitions, but there are some beautiful experiments that point to the fact that by simple adjustment of what you are focused on as you attempt to learn a new skill, you can adjust the number of repetitions that you do, you adjust your motivation for learning and you can vastly accelerate learning. Some of you may recognize this by its internet name, which is not a scientific term, which is the super Mario effect. There's actually a quite good video on YouTube describing the super Mario effect. I think it was a YouTuber who has I think a background in science and he did an interesting experiment. And I'll talk about his experiment first and then I will talk about the neurobiology that supports the result that he got. The super Mario effect relates to the game super Mario brothers, but you'll see why at the end. But basically what they did was they had 50,000 subjects, which is a enormous number of subjects learn a program, essentially taking words from a computer program or the commands for a computer program that were kind of clustered in a column on the right. So these are the sorts of things that computer programmers will be familiar with but other people won't. And those commands are essentially, they essentially translate to things like go forward. And then if it's a right hand turn in the maze, then go right and continue until you hit a choice point, et cetera. So it's a bunch of instructions, but the job of the subjects in these experiments were to organize those instructions in a particular way that would allow a little cursor to move through the main successfully. So basically the goal was, or at least what the subjects were told is that anyone can learn to computer program. And if somebody can just organize the instructions in the right way, then they can program this little cursor to move through amaze, very simple. And yet, if you don't have any background in computer programming, or even if you do, it takes some skill. You have to know what commands to give in what particular order. And they made that very easy. You could just assemble them in a list over onto the right. So people started doing this. Now there were two groups and some one half of the subjects, if they got it wrong, meaning they entered a command and the cursor would move and it was the wrong command for this little cursor to move through the maze, they saw a signal jump up on their screen that said, that did not work, please try again. That's it, if they put in the wrong command or is in the wrong sequence, it'll say that did not work please try again. And then the subjects would reorganize the instructions and then the little cursor would continue. And if they got it wrong again, it would say that does not work, please try again. The other half of the subjects, if they got something wrong were told you just lost five points, please continue. So, that's the only difference in the feedback that they got. Now I have to confess, I would have predicted based on my knowledge of dopamine circuitry and reward contingency and epinephrin and stress and motivated learning. And this other thing that we've been told in many many books on behavioral economics and in the self-help literature, which is that people will work much harder to prevent losing something than they will to gain something, that you hear all the time. And it turns out that that's not at all what happened. If they looked at the success rate of the subjects, what they found was that the subjects that were told that did not work, please try again, had a 68% success rate. 68% of them went on to successfully program this cursor moving through the maze. Whereas the ones that were told you lost five points had a 52% success rate, which is a significant difference. But the source of the success or the lack of success is really interesting. The subjects that were told that did not work, please try again, tried many, many more times per unit time. In other words, they made more attempts at programming this thing to allow this cursor to move through the maze. Whereas the people that were told you lost five points gave up earlier or gave up entirely. Okay, so let's just step back from this because to me, this was very surprising. It violates a lot of things that I'd heard in the kind of popular culture or the self-help literature that people will work much harder to avoid losing something than they will to gain something. And it didn't really fit with what I understood about reward contingencies and dopamine, but it did fit well with another set of experiments that I'm very familiar with from the neuroscience literature. And I'll give you the punchline first. And then we're going to take what these data mean and we're going to talk about a learning protocol that you can use that will allow you to learn skills faster by willingly participating in more repetitions of the skill learning, meaning you will want to do more repetitions even if you're getting it wrong some or most of the time. So the experiment that I want to tell you about is called the tube test. And this is generally done in mice, although it's sometimes been done in rats and it has a lot of parallels to some things that you've probably seen and experienced even in human life, in regular life, maybe even in your life. So here's the experiment. You take two rats, you put them in a tube or two mice, you put them in a tube. And mice and rats, they don't like to share the same tube. So what they'll do is they'll start pushing each other back and forth, back and forth. Sooner or later, one of the rats or mice pushes the other one out. The one that got pushed out is the loser, the one that gets the tube is the winner. Now you take the winner, you give it a new competitor. And what you find is that the mouse or rat that won previously has a much higher than chance probability of winning the second time. In other words, winning before leads to winning again. And the reverse is also true. If you take the loser and you put that loser in with another mouse, fresh mouse, new mouse, the loser typically will lose at much greater probability than chance. And this is not related to differences in strength or size or testosterone or any other things that might leap to mind as explanations for this because those were all controlled for. Now that results have been known about for decades. But three years ago, there was a paper published in the Journal Science, phenomenal journal. It's one of the three apex journals, that examined the brain area that's involved in this. Turns out a particular area of the frontal cortex for those of you that want to know. And they did a simple experiment where the experimenters increased or decreased the activity of this brain area in the prefrontal cortex, little sub region of the prefrontal cortex. And what they found is if they stimulated this brain area, a mouse or rat, regardless of whether or not it had been a winner or loser before, became a winner every single time. And they showed that if they blocked the activity of this brain area, regardless of whether or not the mouse or rat had been a winner or loser, it became a loser every single time. And this translated to other scenarios, other competitive scenarios where they'd put a bunch of mice or rats in a kind of cool chamber, they'd have a little heat lamp in the corner and mice like heat. And there was only enough space for one mouse to be under the heat. And the one that had won in the tube test or that had the brain area stimulated always got the nice warm spot. So what is this magic brain area, what is it doing? Well, the reason I'm bringing this up today and the reason I'm bringing it up on the heels of the super Mario effect is that stimulation of this brain area had a very simple and very important effect, which was, it led to more forward steps, more repetitions, more effort, but not in terms of sheer might and will, not digging deeper, just more repetitions per unit time. And the losers had fewer repetitions per unit time. So the super Mario effect, this online experiment and the tube test, which has been done by various labs and repeated again and again point to a simple but very important rule, which is neither the 10,000 hours rule nor the magic wand Hollywood version of learning. But rather the neuro-biological explanation for learning a skill is you want to perform as many repetitions per unit time, as you possibly can. At least when you're first trying to learn a skill. I want to repeat that, you want to perform as many repetitions as you possibly can at least when you're first trying to learn a skill. Now that might sound like a duh, it just more reps, but it's not so obvious. There's no reason why more repetitions should necessarily lead to faster learning because you could also say, well, more repetitions, you can make more errors and those errors would lead to poor performance like misstepping a number of times. And in these cases, there's very little feedback. It's not like every time the rat pushes forward or moves back that it is sensing, oh I'm winning, I'm losing, I'm winning, I'm losing on a micro level. It probably does that as it starts to push the other one out the rat or mouse probably thinks, "I'm winning." And as it's backing up, it probably thinks, "I'm losing." As you play the game, the super Mario game, you are told, nope, that didn't work. Nope, that didn't work, please try again. But the important thing is that the winners are always generating more repetitions per unit time. It's just a repeat of performance, repeat of performance even if there are errors. And that points to something vitally important, which is reps are important but making error reps is also important. In fact, it might be the most important factor. So let's talk about errors and why those solve the problem of what to focus on. Because as I said earlier, if you want to learn something, you need to know if it's open loop or closed loop and you need to know what to focus on, where to place your perception. And that seems like a tough task but errors will tell you exactly what to focus on. So let's talk about errors and why you can leverage errors to accelerate skill learning. Okay, so we've established that performing the maximum number of repetitions per training session is going to be advantageous. And that might seem obvious but there's a shadowy side to that, which is, well why would I want to just repeat the same thing over and over again if I'm getting it wrong, 90% of the time. And the reason is that the errors actually cue your nervous system to two things; one to error correction and the other is it opens the door or the window for neuroplasticity. Neuroplasticity is the brain and nervous system's ability to change in response to experience, essentially to custom modify itself in order to perform anything better. We did an entire month on neuroplasticity and I talked a little bit about errors and why they're important. Now we're going to make this very concrete and operationalize it, make it very actionable. There was a paper that was published in 2021 from Norman at all. This is a very important paper. It was published in the Journal Neuron which is a cell press journal, excellent journal. The title of the paper gives it away essentially, which is post error recruitment of frontal sensory cortical projections promotes attention. Now, what that says is that when you make an error, it causes an activation of the brain areas that anchor your attention. Remember we need perception, attention, which they're essentially the same thing. We need proprioception and we need the upper and lower motor neurons to communicate in the proper ways. And this vital question is what to pay attention to. Errors tell your nervous system that something needs to change. So if you are performing a task or a skill like you're learning how to dance and you're stepping on the other person's toes or you're fumbling or you're not getting it right, those errors are opening the possibility for plasticity. If you walk away at that point, you've made the exact wrong choice. Unless the errors are somehow hazardous to your health or somebody else's wellbeing, you want to continue to engage at a high repetition rate. That's really where the learning is possible. Without errors, the brain is not in a position to change itself. Errors actually cue the frontal cortex networks, what we call top-down processing and the neuromodulators, things like dopamine and acetylcholine and epinephrin that will allow for plasticity. So while the super Mario experiment, the maze experiment was only focused on generating errors, telling people that wasn't right, please try again or that wasn't right, you lost five points. The key distinction is that the errors themselves cued people to the fact that they needed to change something. So if you're trying to learn a new skill and you're screwing up and you're making mistakes, the more mistakes you make, the more plastic your brain becomes such that when you get it right, that correct pattern will be rewarded and consolidated. And you can trust that it will because the performance of something correctly is associated with the release of this neuromodulator dopamine. Dopamine is involved in craving and motivation. It's involved in a lot of things, but it's also involved in learning. We will do an entire episode on dopamine and learning but because some of you are probably wondering, this does not mean that just increasing your dopamine levels before learning will allow you to learn faster. In fact, increasing your dopamine levels before learning using pharmacology will actually reduce what's called the signal to noise. It will make these increases in dopamine that pop up in your brain that suddenly make you realize, "Oh, I got that one right." It will make those smaller relative to the background levels of dopamine. You want a big spike in dopamine when you perform a motor pattern correctly and you want to make lots of errors, many, many repetitions of errors in order to get to that correct performance. Now, if you're like most people you're going to do this in a way that's somewhat random. Meaning let's say it's a tennis serve. I can't play tennis, I think I've probably played tennis twice. So if I throw the ball up in the air and hit it, I'm going to get it wrong and probably hit the net, then it hit the net. Then I'll probably go too long then I'll probably go over the fence. At some point, I like to think I'll get it correct. The dopamine signal for that is going to be quite big and I'll think, "Okay, what did I do there? "I actually don't know, I wasn't paying attention. "What I was paying attention to is whether or not "the ball went to the correct location "on the opposite side of the net." Remember it's an open loop move, so I don't actually know what I did correctly. But your nervous system will take care of that provided I in this case complete more and more and more repetitions. Now, if I were to just elevate my basil level of dopamine by taking, I don't know, 1500 milligrams L tyrasine or something, that would be bad because the increase in dopamine would actually be much lower. We would say the delta is smaller. The signal to noise is smaller if my overall levels of dopamine are very, very high. So I'm actually going to learn less well. So for skill learning, motor skill learning, increasing your dopamine levels prior is not a good idea. It might help with motivation to get to the learning but it's not going to improve the plasticity process itself and it's likely to hinder it. And so that's very important. So these errors cue the brain that something was wrong and they open up the possibility for plasticity. It's what sometimes called the framing effect, it frames what's important. And so I think this is a shift that we've heard about, growth mindset which is the incredible discovery and theory and practice of my colleague, Carol Dweck at Stanford. This is distinct from that. This isn't about motivation to learn, this is about how you actually learn. So the key is designate a particular block of time that you are going to perform repetitions. So maybe that's 30 minutes, maybe that's an hour. Work for time and then try and perform the maximum number of repetitions that you can do safely for you and others per unit time. That's going to be the best way to approach learning for most sessions. I will talk about other things that one can do, but making errors is key. And this isn't a motivational speech. I'm not saying, "Oh, go make errors, "errors are good for you. "You have to fail in order to win." No, you have to fail in order to open up the possibility of plasticity, but you have to fail many times within the same session. And those failures will cue your attention to the appropriate sensory events. Now, sometimes we're working with a coach. And so this is a shout out to all the coaches, thank you for doing what you do. However, there needs to be at least what the scientific literature say. There needs to be a period of each training session whereby the athlete or the person of any kind can simply pay attention to their errors without their attention being cued to something else. A really well-trained coach will say, "Oh, your elbows swinging too high, "or you're not gripping the racket "in the appropriate way," et cetera. They can see things that the practitioner can't see. And of course that's the vitally important. But the practitioner also needs to use this error recognition signal, they need to basically focus on something and the errors are going to tell them what to focus on. So put simply there needs to be a period of time in which it's just repetition after repetition, after repetition. I think many people including coaches are afraid that bad habits will get ingrained. And while indeed that's possible, it's very important that these errors occur in order to cue the attentional systems and to open the door for plasticity. So if I'm told, "Look, I'm standing a little wide, "I need to tighten up my stance a little bit." Great, but then I need to generate many repetitions from that tighten stance. So if I'm constantly being cued from the outside about what I'm incorrectly, that's not going to be as efficient. So for some people, these learning sessions might be 10 minutes, for some people, it might be an hour. Whatever you can allocate because your lifestyles will vary in your whether or not you're a professional athlete, et cetera will vary. You want to get the maximum number of repetitions in and you want to make errors. That's allowing for plasticity. So science points to the fact that there's a particular sequencing of learning sessions that will allow you to learn faster and to retain the skill learning and involves doing exactly as I just described, which is getting as many repetitions as you can in the learning session, paying attention to the errors that you make. And then the rewards that will be generated, again, these are neurochemical rewards from the successful performance of a movement or the approximate successful performance. So maybe you get the golf swing better but not perfect, but that's still going to be rewarded with this neurochemical mechanism. And then after the session, you need to do something very specific which is nothing. That's right. There are beautiful data describing neurons in our hippocampus, this area of our brain involved in the consolidation of new memories. Those data points to the fact that in sleep, there's a replay of the sequence of neurons that were involved in certain behaviors the previous day and sometimes the previous day before that. However, there are also data that show that after a skill learning session, any kind of motor movement provided you're not bringing in a lot more additional new sensory stimuli, there's a replay of the motor sequence that you performed correctly and there's an elimination of the motor sequences that you performed incorrectly and they are run backward in time. So to be very clear about this, if I were to learn a new skill or navigate a new city or let's just stay with the motor skill, let's say the free-throw or a golf swing or a tennis serve, dance move, novice. So I'm still going to make a lot of errors, don't get it perfectly, but maybe I get a little bit better or I perform it correctly three times out of 1000. And it sounds like something I might do and there I'm probably being generous to myself. After I finished the training session, if I do nothing, I'm not focused on some additional learning. I'm not bringing a lot of sensory information in. If I just sit there and close my eyes for five to 10 minutes, even one minute, the brain starts to replay the motor sequence corresponding to the correct pattern movement, but it plays that sequence backward. Now why it plays it backward, we don't know. If I were to wait until sleep or regardless of when I sleep later that night, the sequence will be replayed forwards in the proper sequence. Immediately afterward it's played a backward for reasons that are still unclear. But the replay of that sequence backwards appears to be important for the consolidation of the skill learning. Now, this is important because many people are finishing their jujitsu class or they're finishing their yoga class or they're finishing their dance class or they're finishing some skill learning and then they're immediately devoting their attention to something else. You hear a lot about visualization and we are going to talk about visualization. But in the kind of obsession with the idea that we can learn things, just sitting there with our eyes closed without having to perform a movement, we've overlooked something perhaps even more important or at least equally important, which is after skill learning, after putting effort into something, sitting quietly with the eyes closed for one to five to 10 minutes allows the brain to replay the sequence in a way that appears important for the more rapid consolidation of the motor sequence of the pattern and to accelerated learning. If you'd like to learn more about this, this is not work that I was involved in, I want to be very clear. There's an excellent paper that covers this and much more for those of you that really want to dive deep on this and we will dive deeper in a moment. This is a review that was published in the Journal Neuron, excellent journal. Many of the papers that I'm referring to were covered in this review which is titled, Neuroplasticity Subserving Motor Skill Learning by Dayan D-A-Y-A-N, I hope I'm not butchering the pronunciation and Cohen, by Leonard Cohen, but not the Leonard Cohen most of us are familiar with, the musician, Leonard Cohen. Dayan and Cohen, neuroplasticity subserving motor skill learning. And this was published in 2011, but there've been a number of updates and the literature that I've described in other portions of today's episode come from the more recent literature such as the more recent 2021 paper. So you have this basic learning session and then a period of time afterwards in which the brain can rehearse what it just did. We hear so much about mental rehearsal and we always think about mental rehearsal as the thing you do before you train or instead of training. But this is rehearsal that's done afterward where the brain is just automatically scripting through the sequence. And for some reason, that's still not clear as to why this would be the case it runs backward. Then in sleep, it runs forwards and certainly absolutely, sleep and quality sleep of the appropriate duration, et cetera is going to be important for learning of all kinds, including skill learning. We did an entire four episodes on sleep and how to get better at sleeping. Those are the episodes back in January episodes, essentially one, two, three, and four and maybe even episode five, I don't recall. But you can go there to find out all about how to get better at sleeping. Now there are other training sessions involved. I'm not going to learn the perfect golf swing or the tennis serve or how to dance in one session and I doubt you will either. So the question is when to come back and what to do when you come back to the training set. Now, first of all, this principle of errors queuing attention and opening the opportunity for plasticity, that's never going to change. That's going to be true for somebody who is hyper skilled who's even has mastery or even virtuosity in a given skill. Remember, when you're unskilled at something, uncertainty is very high. As you become more skilled, certainty goes up. Then eventually you achieve levels of mastery where certainty is very very high about your ability to perform, yours certainty en that of other people. And then there's this fourth category of virtuosity where somebody, maybe you invites uncertainty back into the practice because only with that uncertainty, can you express your full range of abilities which you aren't even aware of until uncertainty comes into the picture. I happened to have the great privilege of being friends with Laird Hamilton, the big wave surfer who's phenomenal. I don't surf, I certainly don't surf with Laird, but he, and another guy that he starts with Luca Patua, these guys, they're virtuosos at surfing. They don't just want the wave that they can master, they want uncertainty. They're at the point in their practice where when uncertainty shows up like a wave that's either so big or is moving in a particular way that it brings an element of uncertainty for them about what they're going to do that they recognize that as the opportunity to perform better than they would otherwise. So they're actually trying to eliminate uncertainty. At the beginning of learning any skill and as we approach from uncertain to skilled to mastery, we want to reduce uncertainty. And that's really what the nervous system is doing, it's trying to eliminate errors and hone in on the correct trajectories. If you perform a lot of repetitions and then you use a period immediately after, we don't really have a name for this, maybe someone will come up with it and put it in the comment section if you're on YouTube, if you're watching this on YouTube, a name for this post learning kind of idle time for the brain. The brain is an idol at all, it's actually scripting all these things in reverse that allow for deeper learning and more quick learning. But if we fill that with other things, if we are focused on our phones or we're focused on learning something else, we're focusing on our performance, that's not going to serve us well, it's at least it's not going to serve the skill learning well. So please, if you're interested in more rapid skill learning try introducing these sessions, they can be quite powerful. And then on subsequent sessions, presumably after a night's sleep or maybe you're doing two sessions a day, although two sessions a day is going to be a lot for most people, unless you're a professional or a high-level athlete, the subsequent sessions are where you get to express the gains of the previous session, where you get to perform well, presumably more often even if it's just subtle. Sometimes there'll be a decrease in performance, but most often you're going to perform better on subsequent and subsequent training sessions. And there is the opportunity to devote attention in very specific ways, not just let the errors inform you where to place your attention, but rather to direct your perception to particular elements of the movement in order to accelerate learning further. So to be very clear, 'cause I know many of you are interested in concrete protocols. It's not just that you would only let errors cue your attention on the first session. You might do that for one session or five sessions, is going to depend. But once you're familiar with something and you're performing it well every once in a while, you're accomplishing it better every once in a while, then you can start to cue your attention in very deliberate ways. And the question therefore becomes what to cue your attention to. And the good news is it doesn't matter. There is a beautiful set of experiments that have been done looking at sequences of keys being played on a piano. This is work that was published just a couple of years ago. There are actually several papers now that are focused on this. One of them was published in 2018. This is from Claudia Lappe and colleagues, L-A-P-P-E. She's done some really nice work, which talks about the influence of pitch feedback on learning of motor timing and sequencing. And this was done with piano but it carries over to athletic performance as well. So I'm going to describe the study to you, but before I describe it, what is so interesting about this study that I want you to know about is that it turns out it doesn't matter so much what you pay attention to during the learning sequence provided it's something related to the motor behavior that you're performing. That seems incredible. I'm not good at a tennis serve. So if I've done let's say a thousand repetitions of the tennis serve. Maybe I got it right three to 10 times. Now I'm being even more generous with myself. And I do this post-training session where I let my brain idle and I get some good sleep and I come back and now I start generating errors again, presumably or hopefully fewer errors, but I decide I'm going to cue my attention to something very specific, like maybe how tightly I'm holding the racket or maybe it's my stance, or maybe it's whether or not I rotate my right shoulder in as I hit the ball across. And I'm making this up, again I don't play tennis. Turns out that it as long as it's the same thing throughout the session, learning is accelerated. And I'll explain why this make sense in a moment. But just to be really clear, you can and one should use your powers of attention to direct your attention to particular aspects of a motor movement once you're familiar with the general theme of the movement. But what you pay attention to exactly is not important. What's important is that you pay attention to one specific thing. So what Claudia Lappe and colleagues showed was that if people are trying to learn a sequence of keys on the piano, there are multiple forms of feedback. There are error signals if for instance, they hear a piece of music and then they're told to press the keys in a particular sequence and the noise that comes out, the sound that comes out of the piano does not sound like the song they just heard. So instead of, and here, forgive me because I'm neither musical, nor can I sing. But instead of dah, dah dah, dah, they hear that, dah, dah dah, dah and then instead when they play. If it were me, it sounds something like, dah, dah dah [indistinct], it wouldn't sound right. It wouldn't sound right, because I likely got the sequence wrong, or I was pressing too hard on the keys or too lightly on the keys, et cetera. What they showed was if they just instruct people about the correct sequence to press on the keys, it actually doesn't matter what sound comes back, provided it's the correct sound or it's the same sound. All right, so here's the experiment. They had people press on these keys and it was a typical piano and it generated the particular sequence of sounds that would be generated by pressing the keys on the piano. Or they modified the keyboard in this case or piano such that when people pressed on the keys, a random tone different tones were played each time they pressed on the keys. So it sounded crazy, it sounded like noise, but the motor sequence was the same. Or they had a single tone that was played every time they pressed a key and the job or the task of the subject was just oppressed the keys in the proper sequence. So instead of dunt, dunt, dunt, dunt, dunt, it it was just dunt, dunt, dunt, dunt, dunt. Instead of dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, it's dah, dah, dah, dah, dah. It's even hard for me to say it in even a tone, but you get the idea. So a singular tone, just think a doorbell being rung with each press of the key will be really annoying. But it turns out that the rate to motor learning was the same, whether or not they were getting feedback that was accurate to the keys of the piano or whether or not it was a constant tone. Performance was terrible and the rates of learning were terrible if they were getting random tones back. So what this means is that learning to play the piano at least at these early stages is really just about generating the motor commands. It's not about paying attention to the sound that's coming out of the piano. And this makes sense because when we are beginners, we are trying to focus our attention on the things that we can control. And if you think about this, if you conceptualize this, pressing the keys on the piano and paying attention to the sounds that are coming out are two things. So what this means is that as you get deeper and deeper into a practice, focusing purely on the motor execution can be beneficial. Now, this is going to be harder to do with open loop type things where you're getting feedback. I guess a good example of open loop would be the attempt at a back flip. If you get it wrong, you will immediately know, if you get it right, you'll immediately know. Please don't go out and try and do a back flip on the solid ground, or even on a trampoline if you don't know what you're doing because very likely you'll get it wrong and you'll get injured. But if it's something that is closed loop where you can repeat again and again, and again and again, that is advantageous because you can perform many many repetitions and you can start to focus or learn to focus your attention just on the pattern of movement. In other words, you can learn to play the piano just as fast or maybe even faster by just focusing on the sequence that you are moving your digits, your fingers and not the feedback. Now, I'm sure there are music teachers out there and piano teachers that are screaming, "No you're going to ruin the practice "that all of us have embedded in our minds "and in our students." And I agree, at some point you need to start including feedback about whether or not things sound correct. But one of the beauties of skill learning is that you can choose to parameterize it, meaning you can choose to just focus on the motor sequence or just focus on the sounds that are coming back and then integrate those. And so we hear a lot about chunking, about breaking things down into their component parts. But one of the biggest challenges for skill learning is knowing where to place your attention. So to dial out again, we're building a protocol across this episode, early sessions, maybe it's the first one, maybe it's the first 10, maybe it's the first 100. It depends on how many repetitions you're packing in. But during those initial sessions, the key is to make many errors to let the reward process govern the plasticity, let the errors open the plasticity. And then after the learning sessions, to let the brain go idle at least for a short period of time and of course, to maximize sleep. As you start incorporating more sessions, you start to gain some skill level, learning to harness and focus your attention on particular features of the movement independent of the rewards and the feedback. So the reward is no longer in the tone coming from the piano or whether or not you struck the target correctly but simply the motor movement focusing your, for instance in a dart throw, on the action of your arm. That is embedding the plasticity in the motor pattern most deeply, that's what's been shown by the scientific literature. I'm sure there are coaches and teachers out there that will entirely disagree with me and that's great. Please let me know what you prefer, let me know where you think this is wrong and it rarely happens, but let me know where you think this might be right as well. So we're breaking the learning process down into its component parts. As we get more and more skilled, meaning as we make fewer and fewer errors per a given session per unit time, that's when attention can start to migrate from one feature such as the motor sequence to another feature which is perhaps one's stance and another sequence, component of the sequence, which would be the result that's one getting on a trial to trial basis. So changing it up each time. So maybe I served the tennis ball and I'm focusing on where the ball lands and then I'm focusing on the speed, then I'm focusing on my grip, then I'm focusing on my stance from trial to trial. But until we've mastered the core motor movements which has done session to session, that at least according to the literature that I have access to here, seems to be suboptimal. So hopefully this is starting to make sense, which is that these connections between upper motor neurons, lower motor neurons and central pattern generators, you can't attack them all at once. You can't try and change them all at once. And so what we're doing is we're breaking things down into their component parts. Some of you may be wondering about speed of movement. There are some data, meaning some decent papers out there showing that ultra slow movements, performing a movement essentially in slow motion can be beneficial for enhancing the rate of skill learning. However, at least from my read of the literature, it appears that ultra slow movements should be performed after some degree of proficiency has already been gained in that particular movement. Now that's not the way I would have thought about it. I would have thought, well, if you're learning how to do a proper kick or a paunch in martial arts or something that ultra slow movements at first are going to be the way that one can best learn how to perform a movement and then you just gradually increase the speed. It turns out that's not the case and I probably should have known that. And you should probably know that because it turns out that when you do ultra slow movements, two things aren't available to you. One is the proprioceptive feedback is not accurate because of fast movements of limbs are very different than slow movements of limbs. So you don't get the opportunity to build in the proprioceptive feedback. But the other reason why it doesn't work is that it's too accurate, you don't generate errors. And so the data that I was able to find show that very slow movements can be beneficial if one is already proficient in a practice, but very slow movements at the beginning don't allow you to learn more quickly because you never generate errors and therefore the brain doesn't, it's not open for change. The window for plasticity has never swung open, so to speak. So it brings us back to this theme that errors allow for plasticity, correct performance of movements or semi correct performance of movements, cues the synapses in the brain areas and spinal circuits that need to change. And then those changes occur in the period immediately after skill learning and in sleep. So super slow movements can be beneficial once you already have some proficiencies. So this might be standing in your living room and just in ultra slow motion, performing your tennis serve, learning to, or thinking about how you're adjusting your elbow and your arm and the trajectory exactly how you were taught by your tennis coach. But trying to learn it that way from the outset does not appear to be the best way to learn a skill. When should you start to introduce slow learning? Well, obviously talk to your coaches about this, but if you're doing this recreationally or you don't have a coach, I realize many of you don't. I don't have a coach for anything that I do. I'm going to have just navigating it by using the scientific literature. It appears that once you're hitting success rates of about 25 or 30%, that's where the super slow movements can start to be beneficial. But if you're still performing things at a rate of five or 10% correct and the rest are errors, then the super slow movements are probably not going to benefit you that much. Also super slow movements are not really applicable to a lot of things. For instance, you could imagine throwing a dart super slow motion, but if you actually try and throw an actual dart, the dart's just going to fall to the floor, obviously. So there are a number of things like baseball bat swing which you can practice in super slow motion. But if you try and do that with an actual baseball or softball or something like that, that's not going to give you any kind of feedback about how effective it was. So super slow movements or a decelerated movement has its place but once you're already performing things reasonably well like maybe 25 to 30% success rate. And I've tried this, I actually, I struggle with basketball for whatever reason and my free throw is terrible. So I practiced free throws in super slow motion and I nailed them every time, the problem is there's no ball. Some of you already have a fair degree of proficiency, of skill in a given practice or sport or instrument. And if you're in this sort of advanced intermediate or advanced levels of proficiency for something, there is a practice that you can find interesting data for in the literature, which involves metronoming. So this you'll realize relates to generating repetitions and it relates to the tone experiment where it doesn't really matter what your attention is cued to as long as you are performing many many reps of the motor sequence. You can use a metronome and obviously musicians do this, but athletes can do this too. You can use a metronome to set the cadence of your repetitions. Now for swimmers, there's actually a device. I was able to find online, I forgot what the brand name was and that's not what this is about, but that actually goes in the swim cap that can cue you to when you need to perform another stroke. And for runners, there are other metronome type devices that through headphones or through a tone in the room if you're running indoors or on a treadmill we'll cue you to when you basically you need to lift your heels. And if you do that, what athletes find is they can perform more repetitions, they can generate more output, you can increase speed. A number of really interesting things are being done with auditory metronoming. And then I'm involved in a little bit of work now that hopefully I'll be able to report back to you about using stroboscopic metronoming. So actually changing the speed of the visual environment. These are fun experiments, basically changing one's perception of how fast they're moving through space by playing with the visual system, something for a future discussion. But you can start to use auditory metronoming for generating more movements per unit time and generating more errors and therefore more successes and more neuroplasticity. There are a number of different apps out there. I found several free apps where you can set in a metronome pace, or it might be tick, tick, tick, tick, tick, tick. That's a little fast for most things, but you can imagine if this were darts or this were golf swings that it might be tick, tick, tick, tick or something more like tick, tick. And every time the metronome goes, you swing. Every time the metronome goes, you throw a dart. Actually there's some wild experiments out there. You know there's a world championship of cup stacking. There's a young lady who I saw could take all these cups spread out on a table and basically just stack them into the perfect pyramid in the least amount of times and all the kids go wild. This is something I'd never thought to pursue and frankly never will pursue unless my life depends on it for some reason, but it's really impressive. And if you look at the sequence 'cause these have been recorded, you can look this up on YouTube. What you'll find is that these expert cup stackers, it's just all about error elimination. But they're two metronomic and auditory cues can actually cue them to pick up the cups faster than they would ordinarily and to learn to do that. You can do this for anything. I think cup stacking is probably not a skill most of you are interested in doing, but for any skill, if you figure out at what rate you are performing repetitions per unit time and you want to increase that slightly, you set a metronome which is slightly faster than your current rate and you just start generating more repetitions. Now what's interesting about this and is cool is it relates back to the experiment from Lappe and colleagues, which is your attention is now harnessed to the tone, to the metronome, not necessarily to what you're doing in terms of the motor movement. And so really you need a bit of proficiency. Again, this is for people who are in intermediate or advanced intermediate or advanced. But what you're essentially doing is you're creating an outside pressure, a contingency so that you generate, again, more errors. So it's all about the errors that you get. Now, these aren't errors where all the cups tumble or you have to stop or you can't keep up, you have to set the pace just a little bit beyond what you currently can do. And when you do that, you're essentially forcing the nervous system to make errors and correct the errors inside of the session. I find this really interesting because what it means is, again you've got sensory perception, what you're paying attention to, proprioception where your limbs are and the motor neurons in your upper lower motor neurons and central pattern generators. And you can't pay attention to, "Well, they're my upper motor neurons, "they're my lower motor neurons." Forget that, you're not going to do that. You can't pay attention to your proprioception too much. That would be the super slow motion would be the proprioception. But you have to harness your attention to something. And if you harness your attention to this outside contingency, this metronome that's firing off and saying, now go, now go, now go. Not only can you increase the number of repetitions, errors and successes, but for some reason and we don't know why, the regular cadence of the tone of the metronome and the fact that you are anchoring your movements to some external force, to some external pressure or cue seems to accelerate the plasticity and the changes and the acquisition of skills beyond what it would be if you just did the same number of repetitions without that outside pressure. We don't know exactly what the mechanism is. Presumably it's neurochemical, like there's something about keeping up with a timer or with a pace that presumably and I'm speculating here, causes the release of particular chemicals. But I think it's really cool. Metronomes, they're totally inexpensive, at least the ones that you use outside of water are very inexpensive. You can find these free apps, you can use a musical metronome. So metronomes are a powerful tool as well in particular for speed work. So for sprinting or swimming or running where the goal is to generate more strokes or more efficient strokes or more steps, et cetera. The rate of the metronome obviously is going to be very important. Sometimes you're trying to lengthen your stride, sometimes you're trying to take fewer strokes but glide further in the pool for instance. But the value of occasionally just the number of repetitions, the number of strokes or steps, et cetera per unit time is also that you're training the central pattern generators to operate at that higher speed. One of the sports has kind of interesting to me is speed walking. It's not one I engage in or ever planned to engage in, but if you've ever tried to really speed walk, it's actually difficult to walk very very fast without breaking into a run. All animals have these kinds of crossover points where you go. I think with horses it's like it was that they trot, then they gallop on, or what's the next thing. Clearly, I don't know anything about horses except that they're beautiful and I liked them very much. But they break into a different kind of stride. And that's because you shift over to different central pattern generators. So when you're walking or a horse is moving very slowly and then it breaks into a jog and then into a full sprint or gallop for the horse, you're actually engaging different central pattern generators. And those central pattern generators always have a range of speeds that they're happiest to function at. So with the metronoming for speed purposes, what you do is you can basically bring the activity of those central pattern generators into their upper range and maybe even extend their range. And there's a fascinating biology of how central pattern generators work together. There's coupling of central pattern generators, et cetera in order to achieve maximum speeds and et cetera. It's a topic for a kind of an advanced session. Costa loves this topic, he just barked. And he loves it so much, he barked again. In any event, the metronome is a powerful tool, again for more advanced practitioners or for advanced intermediate practitioners. But it's interesting because it brings back the point that what we put our attention to while we're still learning is important to the extent that it's on one thing at least for the moment or trial to trial, but that what we focus our attention on can be external, it can be internal and ultimately the skill learning is where all that is brought together. So let's talk about where skill learning occurs in the nervous system. And then I'm going to give you a really, what I think is a really cool tool that can increase flexibility and range of motion based on this particular brain area. It's a tool that I used and when I first heard about, I did not believe would work. This is not a hack, this is actually anchored deeply in the biology of a particular brain region that we all have whose meaning is mini brain. And that mini brain that we all have is called your cerebellum. The cerebellum is called the mini brain because it's in the back of your brain. It looks like a little mini version of the rest of your brain. It's an absolutely incredible structure that's involved in movement. It also has a lot of non-movement associated functions. In brief, the cerebellum gets input from your senses, particularly, your eyes and pays attention to where your eyes are in space, what you're looking at. It basically takes information about three aspects of your eyes and eye movements which are occurring when your head goes like this, which is called pitch. So this is pitch. For those of you that are listening I'm just nodding up and down then there's yaw, which is like shaking your head, no, from side to side. And then there's roll, which is that like sometimes if you see a primate, like a Marmoset or something, they will roll their head when they look at you. Actually, the reason they do that is it helps generate depth perception, it's a kind of form of motion parallax if you're curious why they do that. It's not to look cute, they do it because when they do that, even if you're stationary and they're stationary, they get better depth perception as to how far away from them you are. So you've got pitch, yaw and roll. And as you move your head and as you move your body and you move through space, the image on your retina moves, pitch, yaw on roll in some combination, that information is relayed to your cerebellum. So it's rich with visual information. There's also a map of your body surface and your movements and timing in the cerebellum. So it's an incredible structure that brings together timing of movements, which limbs are moving and has proprioceptive information. It really is a mini brain, it's just the coolest little structure back there. And in humans, it's actually not that little, it's just an incredible structure. Now, all this information is integrated there, but what most people don't tell us is that a lot of learning of motor sequences of skill learning that involves timing occurs in the cerebellum. Now, you can't really use that information except to know that after you learn something pretty well, it's handed off or kind of handled by your cerebellum, but there is something that you can do with your cerebellum to increase range of motion and flexibility. Much of our flexibility, believe it or not is not because our tendons are particular length or a elasticity, although that plays some role, it's not because our muscles are short. I don't know what that would even mean. Some people have longer muscle bellies or shorter muscle bellies, but your muscles always essentially span the entire length of the bone or limb or close to it, along with your tendons. But has to do with the neural innervation of muscle and the fact that when muscles are elongated, there's a point at which they won't stretch out any longer and the nerves fire, and they shut down that you actually have inhibitory pathways that prevent you from contracting the muscles or from extending them, from stretching them out any more. So you can do this right now. If you're driving, don't do it because unless you have a self-driving car, you'll need to take your hands off the steering. But because of the way that vision and your muscles are represented in your cerebellum, it turns out that your range of visual motion and your range of vision, literally how wide a field of view you take impacts how far you can extend your limbs. So we'll talk about this in a second exactly how to do this and explore this. But as you move through space, as you walk forward or you walk backward, or you tilt your head or you learn a skill, or you just operate in the normal ways throughout your day, driving, biking, et cetera, your eyes are generating spontaneous movements to offset visual slip. In other words, you don't see the world as blurry even though you're moving because your eyes are generating low compensatory eye movements to offset your motion. So if I spin, we could do this experiment. There's a fun experiment we do with medical students where you spin them around in a chair with their eyes closed and then you stop and you have them open their eyes and their eyes are going like this, is nystagmus. I don't suggest you do this experiment. When we were kids, we did a different experiment which was to take a stick and to look at the top of the stick and to spin around on the lawn looking at the top of the stick then put it down on the ground and try and jump over it. And you ended up like jumping to the side, you miss the thing entirely. The reason those two "experiments" which I hope you don't do or for somebody else to do. The reason they work is because normally your eye movements and your balance and your limb movements are coordinated. But when you spin around looking up at the stick, what you're doing is you're fixating your eyes on one location while you're moving. And then when you stop those two mechanisms are completely uncoupled and it's like being thrown into outer space. I've never been to outer space, but probably something like that, low gravity, zero gravity. If you spin around in your chair with your eyes closed, you're not giving the visual input that you're spinning. And then you open the eyes and then the eyes only have what we call the vestibular, your eyes jolting back and forth, back and forth. Again, these aren't experiments you need to do 'cause I just told you the result. However, if you want to extend your range of motion, you can do that by... These things always look goofy, but at this point I'm just kind of used to doing these things. If I want to extend my range of movement, first, I want to measure my range of motion. If you're listening what I'm doing is I'm stretching out my arms like a T on either side and I'm trying to push them as far back as I can, which for me feels like it's in line with my shoulders and I can't get much further. I'm not really super flexible nor am I particularly inflexible at least physically. So what I would then do is stop. I would move my eyes to the far periphery. So I'm moving my eyes all the way to the left while keeping my head and body stationary. I'm trying to look over my left shoulder as far as I can then off to the right. It's a little awkward to do this, then up then down but I'm mostly going to just focus on left and then right. Now what that's doing is it's sending a signal to my cerebellum that my field of view is way over to there and way over to there. Remember your visual attention has an aperture. It can be narrow, or it can be broad. And I've talked about some of the benefits of taking a broad visual aperture in order to relax the nervous system. This is just moving my eyes, not my head, like I just did for a second, from side to side. Now I can retest. And actually you get about a five to 15 degree increase in your range of motion. Now I'm doing this for you. You can say, "Well, he gamed it 'cause he knew "the result that he was hoping for." But you can try this. And you can do this for legs too. You can do this for any limb essentially. And that's it's purely cerebellar. And it's because the proprioceptive visual and limb movement feedback converge in the ways that we control our muscle spindles and the way we control the muscle fibers and the tendons and essentially you can get bigger range of motion. So actually we'll warm up before exercise or before skill learning by both doing movements for my body but also moving my eyes from side to side in order to generate larger range of motion if range of motion is something that I'm interested in. So that's a fun one that you can play with a little bit and it's purely cerebellar. Some other time we'll get back into a cerebellar function. There's all sorts of just incredible stuff that you can do with cerebellum. I talked in an earlier episode on neuro-plasticity about how you can disrupt your vestibular world. In other words, by getting into modes of acceleration, moving through space where you're tilted in certain ways, it can open up the windows for plasticity and yet other ways. So you can check that out, it's one of the earlier episodes on neuroplasticity everything's timestamped. But meanwhile, if you want to expand your range of motion before doing skill learning or afterward, this is a fun one. It's also kind of neat because I have this kind of aversion to stretching work. It never seems like something I want to do and so I always put it off. So if I start with the visual practice of expanding my field of view to off to one side or the other side or up or down, then what I find is I'm naturally more flexible. I'm not naturally more flexible. What's happened is I've expanded my range of motion. Let's talk about visualization and mental rehearsal. I've been asked about this a lot, and I think it relates back to that kind of matrix Hollywood idea that we can just be embedded with a skill. Although in this case, in fairness, visualization involves some work. And I've talked about this on an earlier episode that some people find it very hard to mentally visualize things. And some people find it very easy. There was great work that was done in the 1960s by Roger Shepherd at Stanford and by others, looking at people's ability to rotate three-dimensional objects in their mind. And some people really good at this and some people are less good at this. And one can get better at it by repeating it. But the question we're going to deal with today is does it help, does it let you learn things faster? And indeed the answer appears to be yes, it can. However, despite what you've heard, it is not as good. It is not a total replacement for physical performance itself. So I'm going to be really concrete about this. I hear all the time that just imagining contracting a muscle can lead to the same gains as actually contracting that muscle. Just imagining a skill can lead to the same increases in performance as actually executing that skill. And that's simply not the case. However, it can supplement or support physical training and skill learning in ways that are quite powerful. One of the more interesting studies on this was from Rang Ganason at all, forgive me for the pronunciation. This was a slightly older paper, 2004, but nonetheless was one that I thought had particularly impressive results and included all the appropriate controls, et cetera. And what they did is they looked at 30 subjects. They divide them into different groups. They had one group perform essentially finger flection. So it actually sort of the imagine if you're just listening to this, the come here a finger movement. They also had elbow flection, so bicep curl type movement. And they either had subjects do a actual physical movement against resistance, or to imagine moving their finger or their wrist towards the shoulder, meaning at the bending at the elbow towards actual resistance. Just to make a long story short, what they found was that there were increases in this finger, adduction strength, abduction, excuse me, strength of about 35% and the elbow flection strength by about 13.5%, which are pretty impressive considering that was just done mentally. So they had people imagine moving against a weight, a very heavyweight or had imagined people moving their wrist towards their shoulder against a very heavyweight. But again, they weren't doing it, they were just imagining it. Other experiments looked at the brain and what was happening in the brain during this time. So we'll talk about that in a moment. But essentially what they found were improvements in strength of anywhere from 13.5 to 35%. However, the actual physical training group, the groups that actually moved their wrist or moved their finger against an actual physical weight had improvements of about 53%. So this repeats over and over throughout the literature mental rehearsal can cause increases in strength. It can create increases in skill acquisition and learning, but they are never as great if done alone as compared to the actual physical execution of those movements or the physical movement of those weights, which shouldn't come as so surprising. However, if we step back and we say, "Well, what is the source of this improvement?" You might not care what the source is because I could tell you it's one brain area or another brain area. What difference would it make? But again, if you can understand mechanism a little bit, you're in a position to create newer and even better protocols. What mental rehearsal appears to do is engage the activity of those upper motor neurons that we talked about way back at the beginning of the episode. Remember you have upper motor neurons that control deliberate action, you've got lower motor neurons that actually connect to the muscles and move those muscles and you have central pattern generators. Mental rehearsal, closing one's eyes typically and thinking about a particular sequence of movement and visualizing it in one's "mind's eye" creates activation of the upper motor neurons that's very similar if not the same as the actual movement. And that makes sense because the upper motor neurons are all about the command for movement. They are not the ones that actually execute the movement. Remember, upper motor neurons are the ones that generate the command for movement, not the actual movement. The ones that generate the actual movement are the lower motor neurons and the central pattern generators. So visualization is a powerful tool. How can you use visualization? Well, in this study, they had people perform this five days a week. I believe that it was 15. Yes, it was 15 minutes per day, five days a week for 12 weeks. So that's a lot of mental rehearsal. It's not a ton of time each day, 15 minutes per day. But sitting down, closing your eyes and imagining going through a particular skill practice or moving a weight. Maybe it's playing keys on a piano if that's your thing or strings on a guitar, for 15 minutes a day, five days per week for 12 weeks is considerable. I think most people, given the fact that the actual practice, the physical practice is going to lead to larger improvements, greater improvements then would the mental training would opt for the actual physical training. But of course, if you're on a plane and you don't have access to your guitar and you're certainly not going to be sprinting up and down the aisle or you are very serious about your craft and you want to accelerate performance of your craft or strength increases or something of that sort, then augmenting or adding in the visualization training very likely will compound the effects of the actual physical training. There are not a lot of studies looking at how visualization on top of pure physical training can increase the rates of learning and consolidation of learning, et cetera. It's actually a hard study to do because hard to control for because what would you do in its place. You would probably add actual physical training and then that's always going to lead to greater effects. So the point is if you want to use visualization training, great, but forget the idea that visualization training is as good as the actual behavior. You hear this all the time. People say, do you know that if you imagine an experience to your brain and to your body, it's exactly the same as the actual experience. Absolutely not. This is not the way the nervous system works. I'm sorry, I don't mean to burst anybody's bubble, but your bubble is made of myths. And the fact of the matter is that the brain, when it executes a movement is generating proprioceptive feedback. And that proprioceptive feedback is critically involved in generating our sense of the experience and in things like learning. So I don't say this because I don't like the idea that visualization couldn't work. In fact visualization does work, but it doesn't work as well, it doesn't create the same millu, the same chemical millu, the same environment as actual, physically engaging in the behavior, the skill the resistance training, et cetera. And I'd be willing to wager that the same is true for experiences of all kinds. PTSD is this incredibly unfortunate circumstance in which there's a replay often of the traumatic event that feels very real. But that's not to say that the replay itself is the same as the actual event. And of course, PTSD needs to be dealt with with the utmost level of seriousness, it should be treated. In fact, my lab works on these sorts of things, but my point about visualization and imagining something not being the same as the actual experience is grounded in this idea of proprioception. And the fact that feedback to the cerebellum, the cerebellum, talking to other areas of the brain are critically involved in communicating to the rest of our nervous system. That not just that we believe something is happening but something is actually happening. And in the case of muscle loads, muscles actually feeling tension, the actual feeling of tension in the muscle. The contracting of the muscle under that tension is part of the important adaptation process. In a future episode, we'll talk about hypertrophy and how that works at the level of upper motor neurons, lower motor neurons and muscle itself. But for now just know that visualization can work. It doesn't work as well as real physical training and practice, but these effects of 35% or 13.5% increases are pretty considerable. They're just not as great as the 53% increases that come from actual physical training. For those of you that are interested in some of this skill learning that more relates to musical training, but also how cadence and metronomes and tones, et cetera, can support physical learning. If you're interested in that, if are you a fussy and autos, there is a wonderful review, also published in the Journal Neuron again, excellent journal by Herholz and Zatorre, that's H-E-R-H-O-L-Z and Zatorre, Z-A-T-O-R-R-E. That really describes in detail how musical training can impact all sorts of different things and how cadence training, whether or not with tones or auditory feedback and things of that sort carries over to not just instrumental music training but also physical skill learning of various kinds. So if you want to do the deep dive, that would be the place you can find it easily online. It's available as a complete article free of charge, et cetera. Many of you are probably asking what can I take in order to accelerate skill learning? Well, the conditions are going to vary, but motivation is key. You have to show up to the training session motivated enough to focus your attention and to perform a lot of repetitions in the training sequence. That's just a prerequisite. There's no pill that's going to allow you to do fewer repetitions and extract more learning out of fewer repetitions. It's actually more a question of what are the conditions that you can create for yourself such that you can generate more repetitions per unit time. I think that's the right way to think about it. What are the conditions that you can create for yourself in your mind and in your body that are going to allow you to focus? And I've talked about focus and plasticity and motivation in previous episodes. Please see those episodes if you have questions about that. I've detailed a lot of tools in the underlying science. So for some people, it might be drinking a cup of coffee and getting hydrated before the training session. For some of you, it might be avoiding coffee because it makes you too jittery and your attention jumps all over the place. It's going to vary tremendously. There is no magic pill that's going to allow you to get more out of less, that's just not going to happen. It's simply not going to happen. You're not going to get more learning out of fewer repetitions or less time. However, there are a few compounds I think are worth mentioning because of their ability to improve the actual physical performance, the actual execution of certain types of movements. And some of these have also been shown to improve cognitive function, especially in older population. So I'd be remiss if I didn't at least mention them. I'm only going to mention one today in fact. The one that's particularly interesting and for which there really are a lot of data is alpha GPC and I'm going to attempt to pronounce what alpha GPC actually is. It's alpha glycerylphosphorylcholine. Alpha GPC, alpha glycerylphosphorylcholine. See, if I keep doing it over and over repetitions, alpha glycerylphosphorylcholine. There I made an error. Okay, so the point is that alpha GPC, which is at least in the United States is sold over the counter typically is taken in dosages of about 300 to 600 milligrams. That's a single dose or have been shown to do a number of things that for some of you might be beneficial. One is to enhance power output. So if you're engaging in something like Shotput throwing or resistance training or sprinting or something where you have to generate a lot of power, maybe you're doing rock climbing, but you're working on a particular aspect of your rock climbing that involves generating a lot of force, a lot of power. Well then in theory, alpha GPC could be beneficial to you. For the cognitive effects, the dosages are much higher up to 1200 milligrams daily divided into three doses of 400 milligrams is what the studies that I was able to find show or used. The effects on cognitive decline are described as notable. Notable, meaning several studies showed a significant but modest effect on in offsetting cognitive decline, in particular in older populations and some populations, even with some reported neuro degeneration. Power output was notable. How notable, what does that mean, notable? A study noted a 14% increase in power output. That's pretty substantial, 14%. And if you think about it, but it wasn't like a doubling or something of that sort. Believe it or not, the symptoms of Alzheimer's have been shown at least among the nutraceuticals of which alpha GPC is to significantly improve cognition in people with Alzheimer's. Now this episode, isn't about cognitive decline and longevity, we will talk about that, but this is a so-called another effect of alpha GPC. Fat oxidation is increased by alpha GPC, growth hormone release is promoted by alpha GPC although to a small degree. So as you can see, things like alpha GPC in particular when they are combined with low levels of caffeine can have these effects of improving power output, can improve growth hormone release, can improve fat oxidation. All these things in theory can support skill learning. But what they're really doing is they're adjusting the foundation upon which you are going to execute these many, many repetitions. The same thing would be said for caffeine itself. If that's something that motivates you and gets you out of a chair to actually do the physical training, then that's something that can perhaps improve or enhance the rate of skill learning and how well you retain those skills. Now on a previous episode I talked about, and this was the episode on epinephrin on adrenaline. I talked about how for mental, for cognitive learning, it makes sense to spike epinephrin, to bump epinephrin levels up adrenaline levels up after cognitive learning. For physical learning, it appears to be the opposite that if caffeine is in your practice or if you decide to try alpha GPC that you would want to do that before the training, take it before the training use it. Its effect should extend into the training, presumably throughout, and then afterward if you're thinking about following some of the protocols that we discussed today, that you would use some sort of idle time where the brain can replay these motor sequences in reverse. And then of course, you want to do things that optimize your sleep. A lot of the questions I get are about how different protocols and things that I described start to collide with one another. So let's say for instance, you go to bed at 10:30 and you're going to do your skill training at 9:30, well, taking a lot of caffeine then is not going to be a good idea 'cause it's going to compromise your sleep. So I'm not here to design the perfect schedule for you because everyone's situation's vary. So the things to optimize are repetitions, failures, more repetitions, more failures at the offset of training. Having some idle time that can be straight into sleep or it could be simply letting the brain just go idle for five to 10 minutes, mean not focusing on anything, not scrolling, social media, not emailing, not ideally not even talking to somebody just lying down or sitting quietly with your eyes closed letting those motor sequences replay. Then we talked about how one can come back for additional training sessions, use things like metronoming where you're queuing your attention to some external cue, some stimulus, in this case, an auditory stimulus most likely and trying to generate more repetitions per unit time. So again, it's repetitions and errors, that's key. And then we also talked about some things that you can do involving cerebellar neurophysiology to extend range of motion if that's what's limiting for you or to use visualization to augment the practice or let's say your particular skill involves nice weather and it's raining or snowing outside and you can't get outside or thunderstorm, then that's where visualization training might be a good replacement under those conditions. Or in most cases is going to be the kind of thing that you're going to want to do in addition to the actual physical skill or strength training session done, at least in the study that we described for 15 minutes a day, five days a week over a period of 10 to 12 weeks or so. So hopefully that makes it clear. Today we've covered a lot of mechanism. We talked so much about the different motor pathway, central pattern generator. So you now are armed with a lot of information about how you generate movement. And I like to think that you're also armed with a lot of information about how to design protocols that are optimized for you or if you're a coach, for your trainees in order to optimize their learning of skills various kinds. Today we focused almost entirely on motor skills, things like musical skills or physical skills. These have some overlap, they're partially overlapping with neuroplasticity, for learning things like languages or math or engineering or neuroscience for that matter. Before we depart, I just want to make sure that I return to a concept, which is the ultradian cycle. Ultradian cycles are these 90 minute cycles that we go through throughout sleep and wakefulness that are optimal for learning and attention. In the waking state, they are the stages of sleep in which we have either predominantly slowey sleep or rem sleep. Some of you who have been following this podcast for a while might be asking, well should a physical practice be 90 minutes. That's going to depend because with physical practices, oftentimes for instance, with strength training, that might be too long. You're not going to be able to generate enough force output for it to be worthwhile. For golfing, I don't know. I've never played golf with all my friends that play golf, they disappear onto the golf course for many hours. So I know there's a lot of walking and driving and other stuff, I even hear that somebody carries your stuff around for you sometimes, not always. But it's going to differ. A four hour golf game, you're probably not swinging the golf club for four hours, so it's going to depend. I would say that the ultradian cycle is not necessarily a good constraint for skill learning in most cases. And I should say that for those of you that are short on time or have limited amounts of time, 10 minutes of maximum repetitions, maximum focus skill learning work is going to be very beneficial. Whereas two hours of kind of haphazard not really focused work or where you're not generating very many repetitions 'cause you're doing few repetitions then you're texting on your phone or pay attention to something else, that's not going to be beneficial. It's really about the density of training inside of a session. So I think you should let the... Work toward maximal or near maximum density of repetitions and failures provided they're failures you can perform safely in order to accelerate skill learning and don't let some arbitrary or in this case, the ultradian constraint prevent you from engaging in that practice. In other words, get the work in, get as much work done as you can per unit time. And based on the science, based on things that I've seen, based on things that I'm now involved in with various communities, you will see the skill improve vastly at various stages. Sometimes it's a little bit stutter start, it's not always a linear improvement but you will see incredible improvement in skill. If you're enjoying this podcast and you're finding the information interesting and or of use to you, please subscribe on YouTube. That really helps us. As well, please subscribe and download the episodes on Apple and Spotify. On Apple, you also have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review if you think we deserve that. And on YouTube, please hit the thumbs up button if you liked the episode and please give us feedback. Place your feedback in the comment section. That's a place to tell us how we're doing but also to ask us questions. We read all the comments. It takes us some time to work through them, but we read all of them and we use your comments and your feedback to sculpt the content and the direction of future episodes. As well, please check out our sponsors. The sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning of each podcast episode are really important in order to support our production team. And as well, we have a Patreon. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. There, you can support us at any level that you like. In previous episodes and in this episode, I mentioned some supplements. Supplements certainly have their place for various things. They aren't necessary, but many people, including myself derive benefit from supplements for things like improving sleep and immune system function and learning and so forth. If you're interested in seeing the supplements that I take, you can go to thorne.com/u, that's the letter U slash Huberman and you can see the supplements that I take. If you want to try any of those supplements, you can get 20% off simply by accessing the Thorne webpage through that portal, as well as 20% off any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. The reason we've partnered with Thorne is because Thorne has the very highest levels of stringency in terms of the quality of the supplements and the accuracy about the amounts of each supplement that are in the bottle. One of the major problems in the supplement industry is that when supplements get tested, often it's the case that the amount of a given ingredient is far lower or far greater than what's reported on the bottle. That's not the case for Thorne. Thorne has very high levels of stringency, they partnered with the Mayo Clinic and all the major sports teams and that's why we partnered with them as well. So if you want to check those out again, it's Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E slash the letter U/Huberman to get 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne makes. And last but not least, I want to thank you for your time and attention. I very much appreciate your interest in neuroscience and in physiology and in tools that are informed by neuroscience and physiology. Today, we talked all about skill learning. I hope that you'll consider the information, you might even decide to try some of these tools. If you do, please let us know your results with them. Give us feedback in the comments and as always, thank you for your interest in science. [instrumental music]

========================================

--- Video 328 ---
Video ID: xaE9XyMMAHY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xaE9XyMMAHY
Title: Supercharge Exercise Performance & Recovery with Cooling
Published: 2021-05-10 12:00:17 UTC
Description:
This episode I explain the science of heating and cooling the body, a process called thermoregulation-- and how to apply that knowledge to significantly improve physical performance. I describe the three areas of our body that can remove heat (or bring heat into the body) faster than anywhere else, why that is so, and how proper cooling of these areas with specific protocols can allow people to perform 200-600% more volume and repetitions of resistance exercises at the same weight loads, or to run, cycle or swim significantly further. I also describe how to use directed cooling of so-called glabrous skin: the bottoms of feet, palms and face, to significantly enhance recovery times from exercise. Also, why the common practices of trying to heat up or cool the body via the torso or whole-body submersion in cold can be inefficient and/or dangerous-- and the better alternatives. Finally, I discuss the temperature effects of caffeine, alcohol and anti-inflammatory compounds. The information in this episode is focused on mechanisms and tools for increasing athletic or exercise performance.

Thank you to our sponsors:
InsideTracker - https://insidetracker.com/huberman
Helix - https://helixsleep.com/huberman
Theragun - https://theragun.com/huberman

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab

Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Join the Neural Network - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introduction 
00:05:08 Physical Performance & Skill Learning 
00:06:40 Optimal Learning Protocol (Recap): 4 Steps 
00:08:31 Variables Impacting Physical Performance 
00:10:00 Temperature Is the Dominant Variable 
00:12:08 Understanding Mechanism Is Key  
00:13:42 Heat: The Enemy of All Performance (& Why) 
00:16:30 Blood Flow & Sweating & Piloerection 
00:22:35 Heat Is What Limits Effort: Even If You Feel Fine/Motivated 
00:25:29 Proper Cooling Can Double, Triple, Quadruple (Or More) Your Ability 
00:26:42 Heat Induced Confusion & Death 
00:30:02 The Three Body Parts Best For Heating & Cooling Your Whole Body 
00:31:38 Face, Palms, Bottoms of Feet; Glabrous Skin 
00:33:00 Arterio-Venous Anastamoses (AVAs) Are Super Cool(ing)! 
00:37:15 Palmar Cooling Can Supercharge Your Athletic Performance 
00:38:35 ATP, Pyruvate Kinase & Heat  
00:40:55 Palmer Cooling Outperforms Anabolic Steroids Several-Fold 
00:43:45 Increasing Endurance, Willpower & Persistence 
00:46:33 Cardiac Drift, & Moving the ”I Quit” Point 
00:50:44 Deliberate Heating: Myths and Better Protocols  
00:53:20 Protocols For Self-Directed Cooling To Vastly Improve Performance 
00:59:23 How To Use Cold To Recover Faster & More Thoroughly 
01:02:05 Ice Baths & Cold Showers Can Prevent Training Progress: mTOR, etc. 
01:06:29 Alcohol, Caffeine, NSAIDs: Their Temperature Effects Matter 
01:09:44 Are Stimulants Counter Productive For Performance? It Depends. 
01:12:00 The Caffeine Rule & “Caffeine Adaptation” 
01:14:20 NSAIDs for Training: Performance Enhancements & Risks 
01:17:00 The Best Way to Explore Your Own “Parameter Space” 
01:18:35 Tools: How To Try  
01:21:35 Cost-Free Support, & Additional Support & Resources  

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 329 ---
Video ID: JPX8g8ibKFc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JPX8g8ibKFc
Title: Using Cortisol & Adrenaline to Boost Our Energy & Immune System Function
Published: 2021-05-03 12:00:07 UTC
Description:
This episode I describe the biology of two essential hormones we all make: cortisol and adrenaline (also called epinephrine). Cortisol and adrenaline powerfully regulate our levels of energy, focus and immune system function. I describe various science-supported tools and practices to increase or decrease cortisol and/or adrenaline, depending on one's specific needs and goals. I also describe the biology of nootropics, and how cortisol and adrenaline can improve or degrade learning. Finally, I review the scientific data and tools for timing the release of these hormones to improve memory, energy and immune system function. 

#HubermanLab #Science #ImmuneSystem

Thank you to our sponsors
InsideTracker - https://insidetracker.com/huberman
Athletic Greens - https://athleticgreens.com/huberman
Headspace - https://headspace.com/specialoffer

Supplements from Thorne
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Links:
Intermittent Fasting & Growth Hormone Mechanism: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2017.10.016
Habitual Coffee Drinking & Changes In Brain Connectivity: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-021-01075-4

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introduction 
00:05:41 Energy & Your Immune System, & Learning Faster 
00:08:34 Why & How Intermittent Fasting Increases Growth Hormone
00:11:56 Why Your Stomach Growls  
00:13:09 Hot Baths & Hormones 
00:14:35 Energy, Adrenaline (Epinephrine), & Cortisol
00:15:48 Cortisol & Cholesterol, Competition With Testosterone & Estrogen
00:17:54 Adrenaline (Epinephrine) Is Your (Immune Systems) Best Friend
00:18:48 Cortisol Basics In Two (Actually 1) Minute/s
00:19:48 Adrenaline Basics In Two Minutes
00:21:32 Tool: Time Your Cortisol Peak To Waking Using Specific Light Intensities
00:27:20 Brief Increases In Cortisol & Adrenaline Boost Energy, Focus & Immunity
00:30:04 Ways To Increase Adrenaline, Epinephrine & Cortisol & Why That Is Good
00:35:00 Does Mindset During Stress Matter?
00:36:15 Protocols: Adrenaline Breathing Described
00:39:00 Practices To Increase Energy Without Increasing Stress
00:45:00 Using Stressors to ENHANCE Our Immune System: Science & Tools
00:55:11 Timing Thyroid Release For Energy 
00:57:02 Adrenaline/Stress Increase Performance & Memory. IF They Are After Learning
01:02:45 An Optimal Learning Protocol 
01:03:20 Coffee Changes Your Brain & Increases Connectivity Of “Anxiety Circuits”
01:05:43 Nootropics: Two Kinds, & How & Why They Work, “Neural Energy”
01:09:00 Biology of Comfort Foods: From Negative to Positive Feedback Loops
01:14:00 Bombesin: Energy Without Eating 
01:15:00 How Stress Makes Our Hair Gray, & How To Prevent Stress-Induced-Graying
01:18:05 Blunting Chronic Cortisol, Including: Ashwagandha & Science Of
01:25:50 Licorice Increases Cortisol & Blood Pressure, & Reduces Testosterone (by Glycyrrhizin)
01:28:50 Apigenin: Anti-Cortisol 
01:29:53 Protocols For Optimizing Energy & Immune System Function (& Learning)
01:37:00 When Fasting, Exercise, Cold & Intense Breathing Become Detrimental 
01:39:00 Prescription Compounds 
01:39:47 Tools For Accessing Alert & Calm States of “Energy”: Separating The Brain & Body
01:42:11 Ways To Apply Knowledge Presented Today 
01:43:20 No-Cost Ways To Support Us, Feedback, Sponsors, Patreon, Partners, “Office Hours”

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English (United States)
- [Andrew Huberman] Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat music] - I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and reach your health goals. I've long been a fan of doing blood tests and more recently as they've been developed also DNA tests. And the reason for that is that so many of the factors that impact our immediate and longterm health and that inform our health choices can only be analyzed by way of blood or DNA tests. The great thing about InsideTracker is they make getting the blood and DNA test extremely easy. They'll come to your home if you like, or you can go to a place where you can get your blood drawn and your DNA swab taken there. As well once you get the information back from InsideTracker, it's very easy to understand what to do with that information, how to interpret it. And that's really what sets InsideTracker apart I believe from other blood and DNA testing tools and companies. Most sources and companies will give you information back about what your levels of hormones are, and metabolic factors, et cetera, but no clear directives about what to do with that information to get those markers in the ranges that you want in order to optimize your health. InsideTracker makes that all very easy. It gives you directives about exercise, about nutrition, about various supplements you may or may not want to take. And once again, only through blood and DNA tests can you access that information? If you want to try InsideTracker you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman And if you do that you'll get 25% off any of InsideTracker plans. That's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off and enter Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012. And so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. I started taking Athletic Greens and I still take Athletic Greens once or twice a day because it covers all my nutritional, vitamin, mineral and probiotic basis. Of course, you can get vitamins, and minerals, and probiotics from food, but many of us including me find it hard to do that on a consistent basis. Especially when I'm working a lot, when stress and sleep aren't optimized, et cetera. With Athletic Greens I make sure to get all the things I need and then all the other supplements I take or what I eat I can consider additional insurance. The great thing about Athletic Greens is it tastes great. I like to mix mine with water and a little bit of lemon juice. I take it once early in the day and then sometimes again in the afternoon. The fact that it includes probiotics is really important to me. There are so many data now pointing to the fact that probiotics and gut brain health, and gut health generally are very important for metabolism, for hormone output, for neurotransmitter production, so many vital things related to our health, Athletic Greens makes it easy to make sure that I'm getting everything that I need in the vitamin mineral and probiotic department. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman and claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs, plus a year supply of vitamin D three K two. There's now a ton of data as well, pointing to the fact that vitamin D three and K2 are important for a huge number of health related factors, including hormones, metabolic factors, neuro-transmitters et cetera. So they have the year supply of vitamin D three completely free along with your Athletic Greens offer, and you get the five free travel packs. So if you'd like to try that you go to athleticgreens.com/huberman and claim this special offer. Today's episode is also brought to us by Headspace. Headspace is a meditation app that makes meditation easy. I started meditating many years ago, but I found it was difficult to stay consistent with my meditation practice. In fact when I would get stressed or really busy that's when I probably needed the meditation practice the most. And that's when I tended to drop the meditation practice and run around doing other things. So it was really a kind of catch 22. I learned about Headspace a few years ago on Jet Blue Flights when they had them included as an option of whether or not to watch a movie, or a television show, or do meditation. I tried the meditation and I really liked it. Very easy to follow along with a Headspace meditation. The meditations that they include on the Headspace app, are also backed by dozens of peer reviewed quality independent studies. And of course there are now thousands of peer reviewed quality studies pointing to the fact that a meditation practice is beneficial for sake of improved sleep, for reducing stress, and a number of other health metrics, cardiovascular disease, risk, et cetera. The great thing about Headspace is it's allowed me to stay really consistent with my meditation practice. They have meditations of different duration and different type, so you never get bored. I actually look forward to my meditation practice and it continues to benefit me. In fact, since starting Headspace, I've been consistent with meditation for much longer than I ever had previously. If you want to try Headspace you can go to headspace.com/specialoffer and you'll get a free one month trial with Headspace's full library of meditations for every situation. That's headspace.com/specialoffer to get one month free trial, that's their best offer out there right now. And then you can try their full library of meditations for every situation. Today, we're going to continue our discussion about hormones and we're going to focus on how particular hormones influence our energy levels and our immune system. Now, last episode I mentioned at the end that we were concluding our month on hormones, but we decide to include this additional episodes, so this would be the fifth episode in the sequence of episodes about hormones. Because there are two hormones which are vitally important for a huge number of biological functions that we will talk about today, but that are particularly important for energy levels and your immune system. This is something that I get asked about a lot. So rather than skip to the next general topic, today we're going to talk about the hormones cortisol and epinephrine also called adrenaline. You do not have to have heard the previous episodes on hormones in order to understand and digest the material from today's podcast. If I mentioned anything related to previous episodes, I promise to give a little bit of quick background to get everyone up to speed. Today, we're going to talk about the biology of cortisol. We're going to talk about the biology of epinephrine. As always we'll talk mechanism and there are going to be a lot of tools. If you're somebody who struggles with stress and energy levels, and balancing stress and energy levels, today's episode is going to be vital for you. If you're somebody who has challenges with sleep or you're somebody who has challenges getting your energy level up throughout the day, and getting your energy level down when you want to sleep today's episode is also for you. And we're going to talk about the immune system and how to enhance the function of your immune system. We're also going to get into some fun topics related to learning and memory and how you can leverage cortisol and epinephrine in particular, in order to learn faster. we're going to talk about so-called nootropics, smart drugs and how they work, because there's several of them that tap into the epinephrine system that aren't often discussed and that you have access to. We're going to talk about how caffeine can actually rewire your brain for better or for worse. And we're going to talk about the biology of comfort foods and why they work so well, and what they're doing. And in understanding that you'll be able to better understand your food choices as they relate to short-term and long-term energy. So we have a lot to cover, everything will be timestamped. I want to just remind people that we caption every episode in English and in Spanish. The captions take a day or two to pop up on YouTube. So if you're not seeing those within the first couple of days, please be patient with us, in order to get captions that actually read similarly to what I'm saying. we go through a captioning service, and so we have them done by experts and that takes a little bit of additional time. Meanwhile if you have any questions as the episode evolves please write them down. Please put them in the comment section. Please subscribe to the channel if you haven't already, and let's get started talking about how to increase your energy, and improve and increase your immunity by leveraging the biology of cortisol and adrenaline. Before we dive into the biology of increasing energy and your immune system, I want to cover three topics that I promised I would mention from previous episodes. The first one relates to intermittent fasting. The second one relates to why your stomach grumbles. I forgot to mention the biology of that last time. And the third is a powerful way to increase growth hormone, which is powerful for increasing metabolism, fat burning, and tissue repair, et cetera. That doesn't involve a sauna or wrapping yourself in plastic bags and going for a jog. So first intermittent fasting. Last episode I talked a lot about growth hormone and thyroid hormone, and I mentioned things like sauna and exercise, and sleep, and how they can increase levels of growth hormone within the healthy ranges. And why increasing growth hormone can be very beneficial because it can burn off body fat, it can improve muscle and general tissue health, cartilage, et cetera. And we tend to lose, or our levels of growth hormone are reduced as we age. Many people asked me, "well, what about fasting?" Everyone's been promised on the internet that intermittent fasting leads to these big increases in growth hormone. The reason I didn't mention it is that I couldn't find a study that actually pointed to the underlying mechanism. I saw lots of claims, lots of podcasts. Lots of degrees behind people's names, sometimes biologists, sometimes entirely different fields talking about this, but very few studies. And then I found what I would consider the study. We will link to this study. Turns out that fasting does increase growth hormone levels and the way that it does it is fascinating. I mentioned in a previous podcast about hunger and timing of meals and timing of hunger, that when you're hungry you release a hormone in your body called ghrelin, sometimes actually called ghrelin. Thanks for all of you ghrelinisters, or ghrelinisters that corrected my pronunciation, it's both ghrelin or ghrelin, either one works. Ghrelin makes you hungry, when blood glucose, your blood sugar is low, ghrelin is secreted and makes you hungry. And it turns out that ghrelin, this hunger hormone actually binds to the receptor in the brain that normally binds what's called growth hormone releasing hormone. So believe it or not the hunger hormone can act like growth hormone releasing hormone and thereby stimulate growth hormone. Now the levels of growth hormone that fasting promotes through this ghrelin system are pretty substantial. It's about a doubling of growth hormone levels in the waking state. So we know that you can release growth hormone in sleep, intermittent fasting it turns out can increase growth hormone by binding ghrelin to the growth hormone, releasing hormone receptor and it does it also during the daytime. So yes indeed fasting can increase growth hormone, not to the super levels that taking growth hormone would increase it, or that a sauna could increase it, but it does seem to increase growth hormone. Later in today's episode we're going to talk a lot about different patterns of fasting and eating that can control epinephrine. And so we will turn to specifics about how long a fast. Do you need to fast for two or three days, or 23 hours? Fortunately for people like me who love to eat, that's not the case. So we'll talk specific fasting protocols later in the episode. We also said, we're going to talk about tummy grumble, when your stomach growls it is not because of fluid sifting around in there. A lot of people think, Oh, you know it's fluid sifting around. Turns out that your stomach has smooth muscle that lines it sides and when you eat something or you don't every once in a while your stomach cinches off at the two ends like a bag with a hose on either end, 'cause that's essentially what your digestive system is. And if there's nothing in there what happens is the muscles that line the sides of your stomach they kind of extend around the stomach and these cables, those are always there and if you have food in your stomach, what they do is they churn your stomach. They literally turn the muscles of your stomach like a tumbler to help break up the food that presumably you didn't chew well enough 'cause you were eating too fast. When you don't have any food in your stomach that churning continues. And that contraction of the muscle, the turning, literally turning over of your muscles they don't flip over completely, but the turning over the muscles, that's what causes the stomach growling. If you don't want to be the person in the meeting, or sitting there at a in a quiet theater whose stomach is growling, chew your food better. That's the simple solution. And last episode, I talked a lot about how sauna, controlled safe hyperthermia can cause huge increases in growth hormone release anywhere from 300 to 500, even 1600% increases in growth hormone release. Really staggeringly high increases. I pointed out that many people don't have saunas in their yard or in their homes, and they would go through some other measures to increase safely their body heat. You know, creating a steam room in their bathroom, or jogging with extra sweats on this kind of thing. Many of you asked about hot baths, hot bags will increase growth hormone, however the temperatures that you need in order to increase growth hormone are high enough that you run the risk of burn. And so I really can't make any recommendations about hot bath, but if you can tolerate a nice hot bath you are going to get some growth hormone release. However, the sauna has this advantage of you being able to enter 175 degree, or 200 degree environment, provided you're not pregnant, you're not a young child, et cetera. You can do that safely. And getting big increases in growth hormone. The hot bath will lead to lesser increases in growth hormone. We're going to talk a lot about temperature regulation in a future episode, but as always if you're ever going to start playing with hyperthermia or hypothermia, cold baths, ice baths, hot showers, hot baths that are beyond the kind of norm of what's comfortable, you have to be extremely careful and please consult a doctor. I think it's fair to say that most people would like to have a lot of energy during the day, if you work during the day. And they'd like their energy to taper off at night. And I think it's fair to say that most people don't enjoy being sick. Nobody wants to get sick. In other words, you want to have energy, and you want your immune system to function well, to ward off infections of various kinds, bacterial infections, viral infections, et cetera. And it turns out that the two hormones that dominate those processes of having enough energy and having a healthy immune system are cortisol and epinephrine. Epinephrine is the same thing as adrenaline. In the body we tend to call adrenaline adrenaline, and in the brain we tend to call adrenaline epinephrine. And I'm sorry for that I didn't create this naming system. And the story behind it is uninteresting and not worth our time. I will use the words adrenaline and epinephrine interchangeably today. Cortisol is cortisol. And I just want to cover a little bit about what cortisol and epinephrine are? Where they are released in the body and brain? Because if you can understand that you will understand better how to control them. First of all, cortisol is a steroid hormone much like estrogen and testosterone in that it is derived from cholesterol. Now that could be cholesterol that you eat, it could be cholesterol that's produced by the liver. As many of you probably know the relationship between dietary cholesterol, the fats that you eat and blood cholesterol, and liver cholesterol is a very controversial one. It's a barbed wire topic. There are people that claim that dietary cholesterol has zero impact on circulating cholesterol coming from the liver, and there are people who argue the exact opposite, both with good data in hand I would say. There are some problems for the idea that all your cholesterol levels are determined by dietary intake. Namely, that anorexics often have very high levels of cholesterol that their liver produces, even though they are eating very little and sometimes not eating at all. So understand that cholesterol is a precursor molecule, meaning it's the substrate from which a lot of things like testosterone and estrogen are made. Please also understand that cholesterol can be made into estrogen, or testosterone, or cortisol. And that cortisol is sort of the competitive partner to estrogen and testosterone. What this means is, no matter how much cholesterol you're eating or you produce, whether or not it's low or it's high, if you are stressed more of that cholesterol is going to be devoted toward creating cortisol, which is indeed a stress hormone. However, the word stress shouldn't stress you out, because you need cortisol, cortisol is vital. You don't want your cortisol levels to be too low. It's very important for immune system function, for memory, for not getting depressed. You just don't want your cortisol levels to be too high and you don't want them to be elevated even to normal levels at the wrong time of day. So we're going to talk how to control the timing and level of your cortisol. Epinephrine or adrenaline has also been demonized a bit. We think of it as the stress hormone, this thing that makes us anxious, fight or flight. You know, we used to get chased by lions and tigers, and bears, and now we don't. and it's this ancient hangover, that's all wrong. The fact of the matter is the epinephrine is your best friend when it comes to your immunity, when it comes to protecting you from infection. And we're going to talk about why, and epinephrine adrenaline is your best friend when it comes to remembering things and learning and activating neuroplasticity. We're going to talk about that as well. Once again, it's a question of how much and how long and the specific timing of release of cortisol and epinephrine, as opposed to cortisol and adrenaline being good or bad. They're terrific when they're regulated, they are terrible when they're misregulated. And we will give you lots of tools to regulate them better. Cortisol biology 101 in less than two minutes. Your brain makes what we call releasing hormones and in this case, there's corticotropin releasing hormone. CRH is made by neurons in your brain, it causes the pituitary, this gland that sits about an inch in front of the roof of your mouth and the base of your brain to release ACTH. ACTH then goes and causes your adrenals, which sit above your kidneys in your lower back to release cortisol. A so-called stress hormone, but I would like you to think about cortisol not as a stress hormone but as a hormone of energy. It produces a situation in the brain and body whereby you want to move, and whereby you don't want to rest, and whereby you don't want to eat at least at first. Epinephrine or adrenaline 101 in less than two minutes. When you sense a stressor with your mind or your body senses a stressor from a wound or something of that sort. A signal is sent to neurons that are in the middle of your body. They are called the sympathetic chain ganglia. The name doesn't necessarily matter. They release Norepinephrine very quickly. It's almost like a sprinkler system that just hoses your body with epinephrine. That will increase heart rate, will increase breathing rate. In some cases it will constrict your blood vessels, it will also increase the size of vessels and arteries that are giving blood flow to your vital organs. This is why your extremities get cold when you're stressed and your heart is beating faster. More of that energy is being devoted toward your core. You also release adrenaline from your adrenals, again riding on top of your kidneys. Those are second system whereby your system gets flooded with adrenaline in pulses. So you can get one pulse, you can get 10 pulses. We'll talk about how to regulate the number of pulses and you release it from an area of your brain called locus coeruleus, and that creates alertness in your brain. If you want to learn more about the stress response and all the details of that, including some protocols of how to regulate stress please see our episode about stress. I go into a lot of detail there. I will touch on some of the same themes today, but I really want to cover energy and the immune system. And if you're very much interested in stress per say and stress regulation, please see the episode on stress. Okay. So we have cortisol and we have epinephrine, and their net effect is to increase energy. So first of all, I want to give you a tool that will help you regulate cortisol and can also help stave off certain patterns of mental illness. Now of course it's not going to cure mental illness on its own, but it can support healthy state of mind, and can help reduce unhealthy states of mind, including depression. So the first tool is to make sure that your highest levels of cortisol are first thing in the morning when you wake up. One way or another every 24 hours you will get an increase in cortisol. That is non-negotiable that is written into your genome. That increasing cortisol is there to wake you up and to make you alert, it's to stimulate movement from being sleep, presumably horizontal, to getting up and starting to move about your day. And I've said it before, but I will say it again the best way to stimulate that increase in cortisol at the appropriate time is that very soon after waking within 30 minutes or so after waking, get outside view some sunlight, even if it's overcast, get outside view some sunlight, no sunglasses. Never look at any light so bright that it could damage your eyes, but do that for two to 10 minutes. If it's very bright two minutes, if it's not so bright 10 minutes. Do that, because in the early part of the day you have the opportunity to time that cortisol release to the early part of the day, which will improve, this has been backed by peer reviewed studies, it will improve your focus, it will improve your energy levels, and it will improve your learning throughout the day. It will also prevent a late shift in cortisol increase. And late shifted cortisol, meaning cortisol that increases around 8:00 or 9:00 PM is a signature feature of many depressive disorders, including major depression, anxiety. And that of course correlates with things like insomnia, et cetera. So that's a key tool, and I don't know how many of you are already doing that, but it is vital to do. Now I mentioned sunlight even on cloudy days and there are specific reasons for that. So I want to just briefly cover the data because in the episodes on sleep, I talked about brightness of light in regulating cortisol and sleep. And I talked about how to measure lux, brightness, but I was not specific enough I realized based on the questions that I've received since that episode. So here's how it works, going outside and getting some sunlight requires that I also tell you how long and under what conditions. I've said looking through a window is not as good, it takes 50 times longer to get as much light, et cetera, et cetera. Many, many questions have told me that I'm not being specific enough. So I'm going to give you the data and from the data you will understand exactly how long you need to do this each day. On a sunny day, so no cloud cover, provided that the sun is not yet overhead. It's somewhere low in the sky could have just crossed the horizon, or if you wake up a little bit later it could be somewhat low in the sky. Basically the intensity of light, the brightness, is somewhere around 100,000 Lux. Lux is just a measurement of brightness. If you want to download the app Light Meter, that is a free app that will allow you to do that. You can hold your finger down on the little button there and you can move it around, and it will continuously give you a Lux read out. It's not perfect, it's not exact, but it's pretty good. and it is zero cost. I have no relationship to Light Meter the company. On a cloudy day it's about 10,000 Lux. Okay. So tenfold reduction. But bright artificial light, very bright artificial light is somewhere around 1000 lux. And ordinary room light is somewhere around 100-200 lux. And it has to do with how much light scatter there is. So even if you have a very bright bulb sitting right next to you, that's not going to do the job. Your phone will not do the job not early in the day to get the cortisol released at the appropriate time you need to get outside. So let's just set a couple general parameters. If it's bright outside and no cloud cover that light can be indirect. You don't have to be staring into the sun, please don't damage your eyes. We can't regenerate those neurons yet and restore vision that's lost, but if you have to blink, that means it's too bright. It's fine to blink of course, please do if you need to. Get outside for 10 minutes, or five minutes should suffice, but 10 minutes is sure to suffice. If it's a cloudy day, dense overcast, you're probably going to need about 30 minutes. If it's light cloud broken cloud cover it's probably going to be somewhere between 10 and 20 minutes. And if you can't get outside or you're on an airplane and it's bright overhead, artificial lights or ordinary room lights it's going to take you about six hours of light. And by time you reach the middle of your sort of wakeful period, it's too late. You won't be able to shift your clock and your cortisol will start drifting later and later. This is why it's vital to get this light on a regular basis, to get that cortisol released early in the day. That sets you up for optimal levels of energy, it sets you up for great sleep. But today's not really about sleep it's more about energy that cortisol pulse and the stress that you might feel early in the day from having a little bit extra energy. That is the energy that you want in order to move about and learn, and do various things. That is a healthy level of energy. So please try and get that sunlight. If it's within your protocols to do that, and try and get sufficient sunlight first thing in the morning, again within the first hour. That's the best way to make sure that you time your cortisol appropriately. Now throughout the day you're going to experience different things. Most of you are not spending your entire day trying to optimize your health. Some of you might be, but most of you have jobs and you have families, and you have commitments. Life enters the picture and provides you stressors, and those stressors, whatever they may happen to be, a difficult coworker, some disappointment about something, you didn't get the raise you expected, or you didn't get the vacation that you expected. Those will cause increases in cortisol and epinephrine. This is important to understand, you don't have the luxury of just having this morning cortisol and then having a taper off. You want that major cortisol early in the day but then you can expect, you should expect increases in cortisol and adrenaline throughout the day based on events that are unpleasant to you. So for me, the events that are most unpleasant to me are things like traffic, emails that ask me to fill out a form for which I can't find the link. These kinds of things stress me out, I'm a human being. I don't lose my cool over them but I can feel my level of alertness and kind of frustration increased. The normal kind of things that go with stress tense up a little bit. The key is these blips in cortisol and epinephrine need to be brief. You can't have them so often or lasting so long that you are in a state of chronic cortisol elevation or chronic epinephrine elevation. This system of stress was designed to increase your alertness and mobilize you towards things, get you frustrated, and provide the opportunity to change behavior. That's what they were designed to do. So if you find yourself getting stressed and staying stressed, there are great tools that we provide in the stress episode that relate to things like the double inhale exhale, the so-called physiological sigh. You can incorporate NSDR, in non sleep deep rest protocol, et cetera. But understand that the energy that you experienced during stress, that sudden increase in alertness and attention that comes from seeing something difficult. That is a healthy hormonal system and neural system that's working. And the reason it works is that cortisol when it's released into the bloodstream it actually can bind to receptors in the brain. It can bind receptors in the amygdala, fear centers and threat detection centers, but also areas of the brain that are involved in learning, and memory, and neuroplasticity. And this is why I say that neuroplasticity, the brain's ability to change itself in response to experience is first stimulated by attention and focus and often a low-level state of agitation. So understand that, and you won't be quite so troubled about the little stress increases that you experience throughout the day. Now, there are ways to leverage stress, epinephrine and cortisol in ways that serve you and to do it in a deliberate way. There are also ways to do that that increase your level of stress threshold, meaning they make it less likely that epinephrine and cortisol will be released. So I want to talk about the science of those practices, 'cause I get asked about these practices a lot. Things like Wim Hof breathing which is also called tummo breathing. Things like ice baths. Things like high intensity interval training. All of those things have utility. The question is how you use them and how often you use them. Those tools just like stress from a life event can either enhance your immunity or deplete it. That's right those same practices of ice baths, tummo breathing, high intensity interval training, or training of any kind can deplete your immune system or it can improve them. Excuse me, they can improve it, meaning they can improve your immune system. The key is how often you use them and when, and so I want to review that now in light of the scientific literature, because in doing that you can build practices into your daily or maybe every other day routine that can really help buffer you against unhealthy levels of cortisol and epinephrine. Meaning cortisol increases that are much too great, or that lasts much too long. Epinephrine increases that are much too great, or that last much too long. And of course we'll talk about all the negatives that go along with having too much cortisol, too much epinephrine for too long. But you hear about those a lot. You hear about Cushing syndrome, you hear about abdominal fat accumulation. You hear about sleep disturbances. I want to arm you with the tools first and then we can talk about the dark side, and all the things that hopefully you'll be able to avoid entirely, or that you can get yourself out of once you have the tools in hand. Let's say somebody tells you something very troubling, or you look at your phone and you see a text message that's really upsetting to you. That will cause an immediate increase in epinephrine adrenaline in your brain and body. And chances are it's going to increase your levels of cortisol as well. Let's say you get into an ice bath or a cold shower, even if you love the cold, or if you hate the cold, that will cause an equivalent increase in epinephrine and cortisol. We don't know the exact levels but it's probably about the same. Let's say you go out for high intensity interval training, you decide you're going to run some sprints, you do some repeats, or you're going to do some weightlifting in the gym and you love lifting weights in the gym. Maybe you like the power lifting thing, or you decide that you want to do some hot yoga, or some thing that you really enjoy, or you hate, you're going to increase your epinephrine and cortisol levels. There's simply no way around this. Let's say you decide to sit down and you're going to do some deep breathing. We all hear about the benefits of deep breathing. So inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale. You're going to get big increases in epinephrine and cortisol. The data from multiple studies support this. All of those are stressors in air quotes. Now there is a way that you can cognitively reframe what those are. You can tell yourself I love high intensity interval training, or I love weight training. I personally love exercise. I'm not crazy about the cold, I do some cold exposure stuff now and again, and we're going to talk a lot about how to do that in the optimal way in an upcoming episode. But you know, getting into the cold doesn't feel good to me. I tell myself it's good for me and I enjoy it at some point usually when I'm getting out. All of those increase epinephrine and guess what, they increase your levels of energy and alertness. So if you're somebody who struggles with energy and alertness it can be beneficial, provided you get clearance from your doctor to have some sort of protocol built into your day where you deliberately increase your levels of epinephrine and your levels of cortisol. And I want to put the emphasis on deliberately. So how would you do that? Well, it's quite easy to turn the shower cold and get into that, that will wake you up. And it literally wakes you up because of increases in epinephrine. You can do deep breathing of the sort where you inhale and exhale repeatedly 25 or 30 times, maybe hold your breath for a few seconds on an exhale and then repeat, so-called Wim Hoff, or tummo type breathing. Lots of adrenaline is released into your system when you do that. You will have more energy afterwards. So it's really important to understand that the body doesn't distinguish between a troubling text message, ice, tummo breathing, or high intensity interval training, or any other kind of exercise, it's all stress. Cognitively reframing that and telling yourself I like this, I enjoy it. Is not going to change the way that that molecule impacts your body and brain. I sort of chuckle because people would love to tell you that all you have to do is say, "Oh, this is good for me." No. What it does to tell yourself that it's good for you or that you enjoy it. Is that it liberates other molecules like dopamine and serotonin that help buffer the epinephrine response. Now, the way that it does that, I've talked about in previous episode, but I'll just mention that dopamine is the precursor to epinephrine. Epinephrine, adrenaline is made from dopamine, okay? Cortisol is made from cholesterol. Epinephrine is made from dopamine. And that's why if you tell yourself you're enjoying something, and because dopamine is so subjective that you can in some ways, as long as you're not completely lying to yourself, you can get more epinephrine, you get more mileage or more ability to push through something. And you can sort of reframe it, but it's not really cognitive reframing. The cognitive part is the trigger, but it's a chemical substance that's actually occurring there. It's dopamine giving you more epinephrine, A bigger amplitude epinephrine release, and it gives you some sense of control. So here's a protocol that anyone can use. If you want to increase levels of energy, if you suffer from low energy during the daytime, or whenever it is that you'd like to be alert. Pick a practice that you can do fairly consistently, maybe every day, but maybe every third day or every fourth day, maybe it's an ice bath or a cold bath. Maybe it's a cold shower. Maybe it's the cyclic inhale exhale, breathing protocol I described, if that wasn't clear and people always ask for a demo, I'm not going to do the whole thing right now, but I'm willing to do a few rounds of this, or a few cycles I should say. So it's inhale. I would do that more deeply, more like. You do that 25, 30 times repeatedly you will start to feel warm. People in the yoga community, they say you're generating heat. You're not generating heat, releasing adrenaline. Inhale and exhale, inhale exhale 25 or 30 times, you will feel agitated and stressed. That's because you're releasing adrenaline in your body and that's because you're releasing norepinephrine in your brain, and you'll be more alert. Then you can follow that 25 or 30 breath cycles with an exhale hold, and hold your breath for 15 to 30 seconds. Always, always, always do this on dry land. Never while driving, operating heavy machinery, all the standard safety protocols. Never near water please, people have passed out and died doing this with breath holds in water. There are several deaths associated with it, on land it's probably safer, clear with your doctor, but 25, 30 breaths exhale hold, 25, 30 breasts again exhale hold, 25 30 breasts again exhale hold. And then if you like you can do an inhale and hold if that's within your margins of safety. So if all these protocols, all these activities are just equivalent, they're just stress. Then how do we make them good for us? How do we actually benefit from them? Now, of course the cold itself can have some health promoting effects. It can increase brown fat thermogenesis and metabolism, high intensity interval training, or other forms of exercise of course has cardiovascular effects that can be good for us as does weight training, et cetera. But what we're talking about here are ways to increase energy and to teach our brain and body to teach ourselves how to regulate the stress response. So in addition to the benefits of the actual practices what we're talking about is building a system so that when you experience increases in epinephrine and cortisol from life events you're able to better buffer those. And we are also talking about ways that you can increase energy overall. 'Cause that's what today's episode is all about, energy and the immune system. And indeed, we will talk about how you can actually leverage specific protocols to increase your immune system on demand. There's great scientific data to support that one can do that. So there's a biological mechanism that's very important if you want to do those things, increase energy and your immune system on demand. Learn to buffer stress on demand in real time. And it means taking these protocols, these practices whether or not it's cold water, or ice bath, or exercise, or any of those and making one small but very powerful adjustment in how you perform them. But in order to make that adjustment, I can't just tell you the adjustment. I have to tell you the mechanism so that you know if you're doing it correctly or not. This is really a case where if you can understand a little bit of mechanism, you will be far better off than just adopting protocols. So if you take away nothing else from this episode except what I'm about to tell you please take away the information I'm about to tell Cortisol as I mentioned is released from the adrenals and it can bind to receptors. It can have action, both in the body and in the brain. In fact, it can bind to the so-called threat detection center in the brain, or one of them which is the amygdala, also called the fear center. It can do that because cortisol can cross the blood brain barrier. It can be released in the body and cross this biological barrier. It's like a fence that keeps things out of the brain but cortisol has passing rights, it can go through. Epinephrine cannot, epinephrine is polarized, the shape of it is such that it can't make it through the blood brain barrier. That's one of the reasons why it's released both from the adrenals in your body and released from this brainstem area, the locus coeruleus in your brain. That's a powerful thing, because what it means is that the body can enter states of readiness and alertness while the mind remains calm. That is biologically possible, it's not just a psychological trick. And there are ways that one can do that. So I'm presuming at this point that you're getting your morning light to time your cortisol increase. I'm presuming that you want more energy or that you want to increase your immune system, its function and its ability to combat infections of various kinds. And what I'm suggesting is that you pick from the pallet of exercises that are out there, or tools that are out there to increase epinephrine. There are a lot of ways to do that. You can do that as I mentioned through cold water, through exercise. You can even do that by having confrontations with other people. At a biological level, it is identical. So if you like to go online and place the kind of comments or read the kinds of things, or look at the kinds of things that agitate you, you can if you like look at that as an opportunity, I'm not suggesting you do that, I'd like to see people taking care of themselves and each other in much less destructive ways frankly. But the prerequisite here is getting an increase in adrenaline released from the body. Now the simplest way to describe how to do that would be in the context of cold water or a breathing protocol, because then I don't have to deal with the unknown life circumstances that get you triggered, or I could say what gets me triggered but I'm not going to. So let's presume cold water. So let's say you decide you're going to take a cold shower. You get into the cold shower and if it's cold enough, that will be stressful, you will experience an increase in epinephrine, it will increase your alertness. Now you're using this as a practice, as a tool to build you could call it resilience, but the ability to stay calm in the mind while being stressed in the body, epinephrine is in the body. And you do that by subjectively trying to calm yourself. Now you can do that by telling yourself it's good for you by emphasizing your exhales. Anything that you can do to try and stay calm despite the fact that you are in a heightened state of alertness. You do this with exercise, you can do this with music. Pretty much anything that will give you a really heightened state of alertness offers you the opportunity to try and stay calm in the mind. What you're trying to do at a mechanistic level is to have adrenaline released from the adrenals, but not have adrenaline, epinephrine released from the brain stem to the same degree. So you're not just trying to buffer this, you're not trying to say, "Oh, this is good for me, this is good for me, I'm going to grind this out." You're not trying to grind it out, you're trying to move through this calmly while maintaining alertness. You're not trying to zone out necessarily, although maybe that helps. You're not trying to distract yourself, what you're trying to do is shift cognitively your relationship to the somatic, to the body stress response. Now I'm sure some of you out there are shouting, "Yeah, that's exactly like whatever, whatever, whatever." I agree. This is in many ways a self-directed kind of stress inoculation, but we're not talking about this as stress inoculation. We're talking about this as a way to increase energy and focus. And the reason is that epinephrine when released in the body has a profound effect on the immune system. And when released in the brain has a profound effect on the ability to learn and remember information and to be alert. And so we're talking about splitting the location, separating the location from which you have epinephrine, adrenaline released. Okay. So let's say you are doing this practice simply to wake up, okay, cold shower will do that, exercise will do that. The ability to stay calm in mind while having heightened levels of adrenaline and presumably cortisol as well in the body. But the cortisol is going to circulate everywhere. We'll talk a little bit about cortisol more in a moment. You could do that through some self soothing calming way, that's going to be highly individual. You can do it by telling yourself you enjoy it, et cetera. But what you need to understand is that in the immediate period following that practice your system, your entire brain and body are different. Your body is actually primed to resist infection, when you have high levels of epinephrine in it for short periods of time. So the scientific study that explored how increasing adrenaline in the body can improve immune resistance is grounded in a well-known phenomenon that increases in stress actually protect you against infection in the short term. So I want to look at the classic data first, describe what was done. And then I want to talk about the more recent study which is immediately actionable. There are classic set of studies that are really based mainly on the work of somebody named Bruce McEwen, who was at the Rockefeller University in New York. Bruce passed away a few years ago, but he had many decades of incredibly impactful work under his belt when he did. The work that I'm going to talk about next has been done in humans and has been done in animals, and has really explored how inducing stress can enhance the function of the immune system in the short term. And when, I mean short term, I mean about one to four days. I'm not going to go through all the details of the study, but essentially what they were doing was exposing subjects to some sort of infection, either bacterial or viral infection, and inducing stress. It sounds like a double whammy, right? You'd think that maybe getting a little electric foot shock, or cold water exposure, or something to increase your levels of stress and adrenaline would just make the effects of the infection worse, but no, quite the opposite. Brief bouts of stress, which now you should be thinking about in terms of cortisol and epinephrine release we're actually able to increase immune system function. Now that shouldn't surprise you if you understand a little bit about how epinephrine works in the body and in the brain. It essentially is the signal by which the nervous system can inform immune organs, things like the spleen and other organs that make killer cells of various kinds, B cells and T cells, to go in combat infections, bacteria, and viruses. How else would your immune system know that there was an infection? Your immune system can recognize foreign invaders but the nervous system provides the signal, the sort of alarm signal that liberates the killer cells, that tells them there's a problem and to go seek out the problem so to speak. So the duration here is really important because if stress stayed too high for too long, then yes indeed stress can hinder the immune response. But for a period of about one to four days, it actually can protect you by way of increasing the immune response. Now, I can say with certainty that that effect is governed by epinephrine, adrenaline released from the adrenals and not from the brain, because they actually explored whether or not the effect exists in the presence of what's called an adrenalectomy, or removing the adrenals. So I should just say, without the adrenals you don't get the effect. So we know that that effect comes from adrenaline in the body. What does that mean for you? That means if you want to increase your immune system in the short term you want to increase your epinephrine in the short-term. That's why short bouts of very intense exercise probably no more than an hour per day, provided you're doing everything else right, sleeping and nutrition, et cetera, maybe even shorter bouts of intense exercise or exposure to cold water, or that cyclical breathing that I talked about before, because they increase epinephrine they will bolster the immune system. And we all hear these reports every once in a while, it seems to be the thing that every once in a while there'll be an article about how coffee can improve your immune system, or something like that. Indeed caffeine can increase epinephrine and dopamine to some extent, but most people are drinking it chronically. So its effects are probably due to increases in epinephrine and probably whether or not something like coffee or other forms of caffeine can improve or degrade your immune system will probably depend on whether or not you're using it in a way that it increases your adrenaline as a spike, that happens rarely, you know, once every two or three months, let's say you have an infection coming on, yes, indeed. What these data probably mean is that drinking some hot caffeinated tea or some hot coffee even provided you don't get dehydrated from it because you're also drinking some water can probably improve your immune system function, by way of increasing adrenaline release. But so can the breathing, so can cold exposure, so can exercise. The mechanism here is what's key, and I keep saying that because what it means is that you don't actually have to know the specific protocol. I'm not trying to say, do this particular protocol. You have to figure out, and it should be easy to figure out what short term adrenaline increasing behavior you're willing to do on a regular basis every day, or two or three times a week. Now you could say, well, I'm not sick. Should I be doing these things often? I would say, two or three times a week at a minimum if your goal is to keep your immune system tuned up and you are in the presence of a lot of children for instance, which carry a lot of bugs, because their immune system isn't developed, or you work in a healthcare setting, or you're simply somebody who's prone to get sick. I can just say anecdotally, I guess someone now calls this anecdata which I don't like that phrase, because it's sort of... I don't want anecdotal data to ever be misunderstood as anything but anecdotal data. Anecdotally, I can say that I've had instances where I've felt a throat tickle coming on or some sinus infection, I will do the cyclic breathing that I described before. 25, 30 breasts exhale hold, 25 30 breasts exhale hold, 25, 30 breaths exhale hold, and then big inhale hold. And most times I didn't get full blown sick, but I also take other precautionary measures to get sleep, et cetera. So whether or not it was causal, or whether or not it's just correlated I don't know. However, there's a human study that I definitely want to point out to you, because it was published more recently than the McEwen work. It was published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences for the USA, because there are Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences for many other countries as well. The title of the paper is "Voluntary activation of the sympathetic nervous system." That's the system that causes fight or flight AKA stress, and causes release of adrenaline. "And attenuation of the innate immune response in humans." This is Kox et al. PNAS, Proceedings to the National Academy of sciences, 2014. And they incorporate the ever famous Wim Hof breathing Wim Hof breathing is much like the breathing protocol that I've described several times now in this podcast. It's also called tummo breathing. Other people from other cultures and communities have called it other things. The naming really isn't important. Although I do think Wim is a pioneer in trying to bring these practices to the general public more broadly and was involved in this study. The study was done in the Netherlands. It was communicated by Dr. Tamas Horvath at Yale, I mentioned all that. Horvath is a terrific scientist, I'm familiar with his work over many years. Here's what they did. They injected people with E. coli and they had groups that either did the sorts of breathing I've been describing that increase adrenaline release. Although I should say, I don't think you need that breathing to get adrenaline release. You could do it with cold exposure, you could do it with other things, high intensity interval training as well. And what they found was that the response to the E. coli was quite different in the people that had a protocol, in this case breathing to increase adrenaline. So this is a remarkable study because what they found was that the fever, the vomiting, the all the negative effects of E. coli, many of them and some cases all of them were greatly attenuated by way of engaging the adrenaline system. In this case using breathing. They looked at inflammatory cytokines, things like IL-6, which I've mentioned many times on this podcast. This are classic inflammatory cytokine were reduced. Things like IL-10 which are anti-inflammatory were increased. There were some inflammatory cytokines that were increased. What's the point here? The point is you can control your immune system, by finding a way that you can increase adrenaline. And this runs counter to what we always hear, which is don't get too stressed or you will get sick. Learn to control adrenaline, turn it on and turn it off. Learn to control cortisol, turn it on with light in the morning, try and turn it off and then when it spikes because of life events learn to turn it off. Learning to turn on and off adrenaline, AKA epinephrine, and learning to turn on and off cortisol affords you the ability to turn on energy and focus in your immune system. That's the most important point from today's podcast and understanding that it doesn't matter what protocol you use. Maybe it's a cup of coffee and running up a hill five or six times, that will improve your immune system function if you get adrenaline in your system. You can use an ice bath, you can use a cold bath, it really doesn't matter. You get into an argument, but I'm not suggesting you do that, it really doesn't matter. What's important is that you're able to then shut off that response. And there are ways to do that we will talk about, but I want to talk about some of the other benefits of epinephrine and cortisol that occur because of their actions on the brain. Because these are many and they are powerful, and they relate to energy, but also the ability to learn. If I haven't already convinced you that seeing light early in the day is good for timing your cortisol. I should also mention that another hormone that I discussed last episode which is thyroid hormone and is critical for setting your level of metabolism is controlled in part by these circadian mechanisms and cortisol itself. The short takeaway on this is that if you get your cortisol release early in the day it will increase your energy throughout the day, it will also time your thyroid release properly. So there's yet another reason why you would want to get that light exposure early in the day. For me that's a non-negotiable practice. If I'm on a plane, I'll try and get it any way I can. I'm not shining flashlights in my eyes yet, but I really try hard to get that light exposure from sunlight early in the day without fail. And the thyroid increase has to do with the fact that your circadian clock itself is regulated by cortisol and the circadian clock times the release of thyroid hormone. I don't want to go too far off in that direction, but there are a number of studies, Kalsbeek et al. Kalsbeek et al. 2012. If you want to look it up on PubMed is a great one, that describes how cortisol secretion begins to rise during sleep and peaks shortly after waking or immediately before. And that times a set of neurons in the circadian clock that then trigger the release of the releasing and stimulating hormones for thyroid. So a really important mechanism, and thyroid will also tend to correlate with energy but mostly metabolism. Very important to have thyroid in check. Now let's talk about epinephrine and cortisol, and learning and memory. Everyone has a story about being so stressed they couldn't remember something. You know, sit down to an exam. I actually had this happen once sat down to an exam and just blanked, just blanked. It only happened once, I don't know what happened. I don't think it was sleep deprivation but I just completely blanked. And it was very hard for me to pull myself out of that ditch. I did manage to do it, but it was a scary experience. So I think most people think about stress and an inability to perform. However, most of the time increases in epinephrine provided they are not through the roof lead to improved performance. Now this has been shown over and over again on memory tests, on learning new information, on physical performance. That when blood levels of epinephrine are low you don't perform very well. When blood levels of epinephrine are very high up to about 1500 to 1700 pg/mL. If anyone's out there, who's actually measuring this stuff but I doubt you are, performance goes way up. Performance gets better when you are alert and when you're a little bit stressed. Absolutely shown again, and again, and again. If you get too stressed, it's the mental side, it's the epinephrine in the brain that causes people to either focus on their somatic response too much. Like they feel like they're sweating, and they're focused on their bodily response, they're not focused on what it is they're trying to do, or say, or perform, et cetera, or learn. But epinephrine is a nootropic, it is a smart drug that we all make internally, and cortisol is as well. Now here's the twist that does not mean that you want epinephrine high during the exam necessarily. Memory and learning and performance are actually favored, they are enhanced by epinephrine increases immediately after learning. And that's something that's rarely discussed, the timing is vital. So if you learn some information, you have a conversation you're trying to learn a new language, a new motor skill. Whatever it is that you're trying to learn, the increase in epinephrine that occurs just afterward is what's going to consolidate the information. It's going to ensure that the proper circuits and mechanisms in the brain for neuroplasticity are engaged during sleep later that night or the next night which is when the real rewiring occurs. And You might say, "That's crazy, why would that happen?" Well, we have to remember, none of these mechanisms evolved for us to do what we want and learn what we want necessarily although they will allow us to do that. We've experienced this before, we might have gotten up, gone outside get in our car, drive to work or to somebody's house you're not thinking about much at all, and then all of a sudden you see an accident on the road. Your alertness is primed if it happens to be a particularly gory accident, there's going to be a lot of sensory information there. All of a sudden the adrenaline, epinephrine is released into your brain and body. Guess what? Not only will you not forget that event, but you will remember everything that led up to that event which has an adaptive function, because your brain and body's primary concern is safety, right? This is the neuro-biological explanation for Maslow's hierarchy of needs is safety first. And so you have heightened awareness and alertness for everything that preceded that spike in adrenaline and cortisol. So the way to think about this is if you need to learn something better, if you're taking Adderall, or you're taking a lot of coffee beforehand you're actually driving the process in the wrong direction. You're increasing epinephrine for learning sure, but past a certain point you're actually degrading learning and performance. The time to do that is toward the end or immediately after the learning, because this mechanism is not simply devoted to negative events like a car crash or a trauma, it works to make sure that the hippocampus that encodes memories as part of the memory and coding mechanisms is primed. That it's told what you just experienced is important, you're going to need that information later. And so I've talked many times before about using non sleep deep rest NSDR, or ensuring good night's sleep after learning. But what we're also talking about is as the learning event tapers off, as you're exiting that, to make sure that your epinephrine levels are not tapering off as well. And this may be one of the reasons why the 90 minute cycle, the so-called ultradian cycle for learning works, because it takes a few minutes to get into rhythm of learning. You can maintain that alertness for about 90 minutes, it's no coincidence that these podcasts are typically about 90 minutes long. And as you exit that 90 minutes you're going to start to feel fatigued. You're not going to be able to continue to secrete epinephrine at the same level. So I'm not telling you that at the end of this podcast you should give yourself a foot shock, or that you should jump into an ice bath. Although I will say, if you were to increase your epinephrine at the end of this episode by breathing or by way of cold shower, I'm willing to bet based on numerous published studies that the memory for the information would be enhanced. Because of this retroactive effect of epinephrine and cortisol. Put simply you can remember things better if you increase your alertness, AKA your level of epinephrine and cortisol after, immediately after something that you want to learn. So I'm reminded by people here at the Huberman Lab Podcast that the optimal strategy therefore would be a 90 minute session of focus or learning then immediately after cold shower or tummo type breathing, or ice bath or something of that sort, maybe a hard run, or hit training if you can't get access to the other things. And then shower up and do a non sleep deep rest, and then get a good night's sleep. Those would be the optimal tools and the organization of tools for enhanced learning. And of course you could use caffeine to prime the whole process by drinking the caffeine towards the tail of the learning episode, which is counter-intuitive at least to me. I should mention since many of you use caffeine and I use caffeine. I do drink coffee, I love mushroom coffee. I love mate. I drink caffeine and various forms. There was a study that came out recently that is relevant to our discussion about energy and alertness, and learning. And the study came out just recently March 2021, it's Maglhaes et al. So MAGALHAES. And it was published in molecular psychiatry which is a fine journal, a peer review journal. And the title pretty much gives it away, "Habitual coffee drinkers display a distinct pattern of brain functional conductivity." Chronically drinking coffee changes brain conductivity. And it does it in a number of ways but the key takeaways from this study, as it relates to sort of what the circuits do as opposed to me just listing off a bunch of brain circuits, which is kind of meaningless in this conversation is that people who drank coffee habitually every day had changes in their brain circuitry, such that there was a shift or a bias toward anxiety even when they don't ingest caffeine. So a lot of times we think, Oh caffeine increases your levels of anxiety. And indeed it appears it does if you use it chronically, but not just to caffeine, it doesn't just raise your baseline of anxiety because of what circulating in your bloodstream. It actually increases connectivity between the brain areas that relate to anxiety. Now that could be a good thing or a bad thing depending on how you look at it. For people that have are prone to chronic panic attacks or anxiety attacks that's not going to be good. Some people might use caffeine in healthy ways. I believe I do in order to just increase overall levels of alertness. Although now not only am I going to start delaying my caffeine intake till two hours after I wake up for reasons I've talked about in previous episodes, but I'm also going to start drinking it later in learning and focus sessions as a way to enhance plasticity around those learning and focus sessions, not before. So interesting study, it's free online. You can access the full paper online, we will put a link as well. I want to mention this issue of nootropics, so-called smart drugs. Which is not a topic that I particularly enjoy because I don't like the name. I don't like the idea of a nootropic, because what is a smart drug? Well, there's different kinds of smart, there's creativity, there's task switching, their strategy building, their strategy implementation. And most of the nootropics that are out there just cocktails of a bunch of different things that aren't tailored to the individual at all. They all seem to have some caffeine, or some culinary trick stimulation, et cetera. But there's an important way to frame this in light of today's conversation. Nootropics generally fall into two categories, one category are nootropics that increase blood glucose. So these are compounds that people take they increased blood glucose and increasing in blood glucose will improve performance, and can enhance learning in some situations. I'm not suggesting people take these things, but here's just a list of a few of those. Some of them are legal, some of them are gray market, some of them are illegal. piracetam, oxiracetam, aniracetam, all the Tams, okay. Elevate blood glucose that's how they work. The neural effects that you hear are secondary or tertiary to the fact that they just increased blood glucose. We know that because if you block the blood glucose effect you block the nootropic effect, okay. Others include, and definitely don't take these please, amphetamine, cocaine. Those will increase learning in the short term in particular dosages, but because they increase blood glucose. And then of course, things like painful stimuli or stress will improve learning by way of increasing blood glucose. Now stress and epinephrine that's associated with it not only improve performance during the learning about, but as I mentioned before having epinephrine come up afterward will increase the retention of that information in the longterm. And then of course, there's a whole category of nootropics that don't impact blood glucose, that work by increasing the cholinergic system activity. And these are things like choline, lecithin, Physostigmine, it's a prescription drug, phosphodiesterase. So there're ways to increase energy that don't require increase in blood glucose, and this is a vitally important. The reason we're talking about epinephrine and cortisol for increasing energy and immune system function is because they are largely independent of blood glucose. Of course, they interact with that system, but we heard so much growing up you need to eat for energy, but the energy that we're talking about today is actually a much more powerful one than the one that you derive from food, We could call it neural energy. It's neurotransmitters that create alertness, and focus, and the willingness and the ability to move. And the willingness and ability for immune system to move in response to intruders. So I think we all too often think about food as energy which is great because it is, but there are other sources of energy that are neural and they relate to these hormone systems, cortisol and epinephrine. And that's why we're focused on today. So up until now we've been talking about increasing energy and increasing the immune system by way of cortisol and epinephrine, but I'd be totally remiss if I didn't cover how cortisol and epinephrine if chronically elevated, or if elevated too high can have a lot of detrimental effects. These are the things we normally hear about. I'm going to describe some of those things but I'm also going to talk about ways to ameliorate them. Ways that you can adjust the cortisol levels, even if you're stressed. Ways that you can adjust epinephrine levels even if you're stressed so that they have less of a negative impact. I don't have to list off all the ways that stress is terrible and chronic stress is terrible I think you know. Insomnia, your immune system over time will get battered and you won't be able to fight infection off as well, right? You don't want to be stressed for too long. You can start laying down the sort of classic pattern of cortisol induced body fat. In fact, there's a whole literature related to comfort foods and why we want to consume comfort foods under conditions of chronic stress. And it's quite interesting actually, because it reveals something about the biology of chronic stress that's informative for how to prevent it, or to down regulate chronic stress once it's occurred. So let's talk for a second about comfort foods and the work that I'm going to refer to is work that was done by a very impressive scientist by the name of Mary Dallman. Her work goes back decades. She was at University of California San Francisco, and she asked this question that on the face of it seems kind of obvious, but for which there was no mechanism known until Mary and her lab personnel came along. And the question was, why do we seek high-fat and or high sugar foods when we are stressed for awhile? Why would that be? And the reason is that the so-called glucocorticoids of which cortisol is a glucocorticoid. It's caused as we've mentioned before, by releasing hormones from the brain, and ACTH from the pituitary, et cetera. But normally high levels of glucocorticoid shut off the releasing hormones in the brain and in the pituitary, they shut down in a so-called negative feedback loop. So just like if testosterone or estrogen get too high that's read out or that is seen so to speak by neurons in the pituitary and brain and then we shut down our production of estrogen and testosterone. If cortisol levels get too high, if there's too much cortisol floating around in our bloodstream, there's a negative feedback loop, and the brain and pituitary shutdown, CRH and ACTH which would otherwise stimulate more cortisol, so cortisol levels go down. So it's a beautiful negative feedback loop. Chronic stress however, stress that lasts more than four to seven days and there's a way to think about what chronic stress really is in an actionable way, 'causes changes in the feedback loop between the adrenals and the brain and the pituitary. Such that now the brain and the pituitary respond to high levels of glucocorticoids cortisol by releasing more of them. It becomes a positive feedback loop and that's bad it actually gets right down to levels of gene regulation and transcription and translation. And so you really don't want chronic stress, because it's a cascade of stress equals more stress equals more stress. So this is why it's very important to learn to turn off the stress response. You don't want it elevated for too long. So there's one study that Dallman and her colleagues did where they stimulate chronic stress by increasing corticosteroids, cortisol. And they found that subjects would increase their consumption of sugar and fat. In fact they would even eat lard It's sounds disgusting, but they were willing to just eat more fat and more sugar. And that led to all sorts of things like type two diabetes that led to dysfunction in the adrenal output, et cetera. And so the real key is to learn to shut off the stress response. Because the interesting thing is, is that dominant colleagues and some studies that followed up on their work found that if the system was kicked into motion for too long, then there was a tremendous shift overall towards anxiety, because it turns out that body fat itself receives neural innervation. Neurons actually talked to body fats so now you have body fat releasing certain hormones, you've got the adrenals releasing cortisol, and all of that is feeding back to the brain to make you want more sugar and fatty foods. So that's how the so-called comfort foods work. And you should watch yourself next time you experience stress. If it's a short-term about of stress, typically it blocks hunger. If it's a longer about of stress typically it triggers hunger, in particular for these so-called comfort foods, sugary and fatty foods. And it's kind of interesting how short-term stress can actually block hunger. It does that by activating or interacting with a system called the bombesin system. Bombesin is a peptide hormone. I think it was named after some sort of reptiles or amphibians, excuse me, some sort of toad. I think it was initially sequenced from the toad before it was later discovered in humans. And I think the Toad's Latin name is Bombina bombina, or something of that sort. And so they decided to call this thing bombesin, but it reduces eating and stress liberates bombesin and makes you want to eat less. But chronic stress causes all these positive feedback changes, which are not positive. I'm calling them positive because they amplify the stress response over and over not because they are good for you. So short-term stress great, long-term stress really, really bad. Other bad effects of stress that we can talk about and I won't list off too many more of these, because you know so many of them, you hear about them. You really want to know how to control them I'm guessing is that yes indeed stress can make you go gray. The rates at which people go gray, meaning gray hair, some cases gray body hair as well depend on some genetic factors. There are a couple of ways that we can go gray. There's actually a STEM cell, what they call niche in every follicle. So you have STEM cells in the follicle that can produce more and more of the given hair cell. And they're actually peroxide groups. You know we hear about bleaching hair with peroxide, at least in the 80s that was a thing, but you can use hydrogen peroxide to bleach things, and you can produce your own peroxide in the hair follicle, that will cause the hairs to go gray. In addition pigmentation of hair, just like pigmentation of skin is controlled by melanocytes, our old friends, the melanocytes. And I say old friends 'cause on previous episodes I talked about why sunlight and getting ample sunlight can increase levels of certain things like melanocytes stimulating hormone which reduce hunger. It can improve testosterone and estrogen levels and all the reasons for that. Well, it turns out that activation of the so-called sympathetic nervous system, which is really just another name for the system that liberates adrenaline from the adrenals and epinephrine in the brain drives depletion of melanocytes in hair stem cells. So indeed there's a rate of aging that we will undergo based on our genetics, but stress will make us go gray. And the paper that you should look to if you want to read more about this came out very recently. This is Zang et al, Z H A N G et al. Nature. Fabulous journal, definitely one of the apex journals, 2020. So this paper showed that the activation of stress in various forms will deplete these melanocytes stem cells. You do not have to worry about an ice bath, or hard exercise or breathing, increasing your levels of stress to the point where it's going to make you go gray. We're talking again about chronic stress. And if you want to offset the stress effects on graying of hair you can do that by either having a practice that helps you regulate stress on a consistent basis. So something like non sleep deep breath, or meditation. You can get access to massages or vacations those are great, but having a practice to keep stress clamps so that it's not chronically elevated, that will be great as well. This is another case where sunlight we know stimulates melanocytes, not just in skin, but in hair. And so getting ample sunlight, having a practice to regulate stress will offset the stressed induced grain of hairs by way of stress induced depletion of melanocytes. And if melanocytes sounds a lot like melanin you're right. That's because anything involved with pigmentation in the brain and body generally has "melano" up in the front of the word in some way or another. So if chronic stress is so bad because of its effects on epinephrine and cortisol being elevated for too long then the question becomes of course, well, what's chronic stress? How do I know the difference between chronic and acute stress? And how do I keep chronic stress at bay? Because of all these negative effects, I didn't even list out the number of other ones, the effects on depression, which certainly has a correlate with elevated cortisol. Thyroid hormone. Low thyroid hormone is associated with depression. Mistimed thyroid, once again getting your light and your feeding and your exercise and your sleep on a consistent schedule or consistent ish is going to be the most powerful thing you can do in order to buffer yourself against negative effects on mental health and physical health for that matter. There are things that one can take supplements, prescription drugs, et cetera. Some of you out there may have or may know people that have Cushing's, which is chronically elevated cortisol. There are prescription drugs that we will talk about that can be used. But most people are dealing with a situation where life gets stressful then less stressful, stressful then less stressful. I would say, based on the data from McEwen and others, Bob Sapolsky's Lab over many years. I would say any stress that lasts more than a day or two days, or three days is starting to become chronic stress. There's really no strict cutoff because we're not measuring everybody's cortisol from moment to moment. My lab has done experiments where we measure stress in people over time. People vary tremendously in their ability to have a really hard day and then fall deeply asleep. That's going to be the ultimate reset is the ability to sleep well more or less undisturbed each night, although one or two wake ups during the night, probably not going to be too detrimental provided they're not too long, and you're not viewing light during those wake-ups or your phone. But the things that you can take, if you feel like you're chronically stressed and you're veering toward some of the negative effects of stress are many. There are some simple things that people can do in terms of supplementation. All supplements of course have to be checked out for their safety margins for you, because there going to differ from person to person. You're responsible for making sure they're safe for you if you decide to use them. One of the most common ones is Ashwagandha and it has a powerful anxiolytic anti-anxiety effect. You're welcome to go to examine.com and for zero cost you can see their so-called human effect matrix. Ashwagandha has many uses, It's been used to enhance power output in athletes it has been shown to modestly increase testosterone. It has been shown to modestly adjust things like low density lipoprotein cholesterol, the so-called bad cholesterol in quotes. It has a profound effect on anxiety that's been shown in nine studies. Nine peer reviewed independent studies, mean funded by organizations that have no vested interest in the answer. It has a very strong effect on cortisol itself. How strong? The decrease in cortisol noted in humans is 14.5 to 27.9% reduction in otherwise healthy but stressed humans. That's great. Six studies. And it mentions there's a significantly larger than many other supplements. Now, some people will say that taking Ashwagandha chronically may not be good. If you've heard about that, or you can point to specific studies that indicate exactly why it's not good, please put in the comment section or let me know. In the comment section on YouTube would be best. The studies that I'm referring to did explore both genders. The number of subjects was reasonably high, 64 or more. One to six months study, so these were long-term studies. That's great, you like to see that not just in an acute study. So males and females lots of different ages overweight and non overweight. They did blood draws of cortisol which is going to end and as well as saliva test. Saliva is actually the best way to measure free cortisol. You can also measure it from ear wax it turns out which sounds pretty gross and kind of is. But nonetheless that's where cortisol will accumulate in earwax and in saliva, the free cortisol. But that's six very quality studies, independently supported that all points to these very significant, you know, 14.5 to 27.9% reductions in otherwise healthy adults. So if you're somebody who is dealing with chronic stress, it's a stressful period in your life and you want to stave off the negative effects of stress. Well then ashwagandha may, I want to highlight, may be right for you. It also does tend to lower total cortisol which is interesting. It can lower depression to at somewhat minimal degree, and can lower as I mentioned before things like low density lipoprotein. I think ashwagandha comes through is kind of the heavy hitter in department. Now what's interesting also is the other effects of ashwagandha that are downstream of reducing chronic stress and cortisol, 'cause cortisol has so many effects, there're receptors for cortisol all over the body and brain. And so I'll just list these off quickly, I'm not going to list off each study or talk about how many subjects in detail. Again, you can go to examine.com if you want, and just put it in Ashwagandha. See reactive protein, which is a marker of all sorts of negative health effects. Cardiovascular health, even macular degeneration is notably reduced. Heart palpitations notably reduced. serum T3 and T4, our old friends from the thyroid hormones from a previous episode are increased. Symptoms of OCD decreased, both the obsessions and the compulsion's right obsessions are of the mind compulsions are of behavior. So there are a lot of things that are downstream of reducing cortisol. Lowered heart rate, lowered rates of insomnia, slightly improved memory. Why that would be, I don't know, because cortisol in the short term can increase memory, I'm guessing it's from increased sleep. Decreased pain, increased quality of you know... Decreased reaction times, things of that sort. So the list goes on and on, but all of those things stem downstream of decreased cortisol. So if one were to decide to take ashwagandha in order to reduce cortisol, given that you want cortisol early in the day to have energy throughout the day, the time to take it as probably later in the day or in the evening. I've never heard of it preventing sleep or causing insomnia of any kind. That certainly wasn't listed as one of the major effects on examine.com. I will take ashwagandha from time to time if I'm chronically stressed, or if I'm not sleeping as well as I ought to. You might think that with all my knowledge about sleep and sleep protocols that I would sleep perfectly every night, but unfortunately I have a dog that has a canine form of of sundowners, of dementia, so he's up much of the night, these days. And so there's no way I'm getting a solid night of sleep lately. And so I will supplement with ashwagandha and typically I'll take it before sleep and maybe also with my last meal of the day, which is at least two hours before I go to sleep. Again you have to decide if it's right for you. The dosages can vary tremendously. I would just go buy what's on the bottle from a reputable brand. I would also check out examine.com, because it mentions a range of dosages that people have used. And in various studies to different effects. Now, there is something out there that some of you may actually be taking or ingesting that can increase cortisol and not so incidentally can decrease estrogen and testosterone. Because remember cortisol is made from the cholesterol molecule so is estrogen and testosterone. So are estrogen and testosterone, excuse me, and it's competitive. So you're either making more cortisol, or you're making more of the sex steroid hormones, estrogen and testosterone. Believe it or not liquorice, which I always thought of as a candy, but liquorice contains a substance that I can't pronounce. G L Y C Y R R H I Z I N. Glycyrrhizin, which is of the glabra species of plant, actually because of its chemistry, this 18-beta-hydroxy-cholenoic acid, you don't need to know all that. Liquorice, black liquorice contains a substance that increases cortisol, and it's increases not huge, but it is significant. This has been looked at in females age 18 to 29, males and females age 18 to 29, people age 30. These are separate studies where I'm listing off the different ages, ages 30 to 64. It turns out that you can see pretty substantial increases in serum cortisol and decreases in testosterone and estrogen. So that was complete news to me. Also increases in blood pressure that are pretty substantial. That's going to be downstream of cortisol, increasing cortisol increase blood pressure in order to engage the stress response as part of the stress response. Increased hormones of other kinds that are associated with stress. Who knew? I didn't know maybe you knew, previously if you did forgive me but licorice and some of the compounds in black licorice can actually increase stress. Probably not the thing to be ingesting during periods of chronic stress. Whether or not anyone has had positive effects of using it to increase cortisol and other contexts, let me know, but very interesting that the chemistry of licorice increases stress hormones, and therefore you would probably want to, almost certainly we want to avoid it in conditions of chronic stress. Also, if you're trying to optimize testosterone and estrogen liquorice seems like a bad idea. I suppose one instance where you might want to use licorice would be if you're traveling and you're trying to wake up at a particular location, because licorice has these effects on cortisol and cortisol is associated with the waking phenomenon and alertness and energy, you could use it in that regard. However, I would be careful to time it so that you're not getting two cortisol increases throughout the day, two peaks. So you're going to want to make sure that you're doing all the other things correct for jet lag and adjusting to jet lag. And if you want to know what those things are, including timing your feeding, using temperature, using exercise, using light to adjust to jet lag more quickly, please see the episode that we did on jet lag and shift work where I cover all those protocols in detail. The other compound that I think deserves attention is apigenin. A P I G E N I N, apigenin. which is what's found in chamomile. Apigenin I've talked about previously. It has various effects one is it is a mild anti-estrogen that's been shown in various studies, and it does have a bit of an anxiolytic effect of reducing anxiety. I take it before bedtime, 50 milligrams. Again, you have to decide or figure out if that's safe for you or not. I'm not suggesting you take it. The major source of action is to calm the nervous system. And it does that primarily by adjusting things like GABA and chloride channels but it also has a mild effect in reducing cortisol. So Ashwagandha and Apigenin together, I would consider the most potent commercial compounds that are in supplement non-prescription form that one could use if they were interested in reducing chronic stress, especially late in the day by way of reducing cortisol late in the day. So you're probably getting the impression that cortisol and epinephrine are a bit of a double-edged sword. You want them elevated, but not for too long or too much. You don't want them up for days and days, and days, but you do want to have a practice in order to increase them in the short term. So we should talk about protocols that can set a foundation of cortisol and epinephrine that is headed towards optimal. Optimization is always going to be a series of regular practices that you do every day. So sleeping at certain times, light at specific times, food at specific times. Certain foods, et cetera, and that's highly individual, but there are some universals and we've covered a number of those in the discussion today. Meal timing, meal schedules has a profound effect on energy levels. And as I mentioned before the energy I'm referring to is not glucose energy. It's not burning carbs while running or ketones. What I'm talking about is neural energy, epinephrine and cortisol. Fasting and timing one's eating are two sides of the same coin. So even if you're on a kind of standard three meal a day with a couple of snacks in between diet or nutrition regimen, you are fasting whenever you're asleep, or you're not ingesting any calories. So unless you're hooked up to an IV of glucose you are fasting while you're sleeping. There are several different kinds of fasting that can relate to epinephrine and cortisol. I will do an entire episode on optimizing food intake for performance in the sports context. That's coming up but in the meantime, I'd like to just talk about fasting as a source of epinephrine. Anytime when our blood glucose is low cortisol and epinephrine are going to go up. If we fast for too long, that is stress. There's no way around that. Now that doesn't mean it doesn't have other beneficial effects. Running a marathon is stress, but it can also have positive effects if that's your thing. So stress has been demonized as a term, but we want to think about stress mechanistically, as epinephrine and cortisol. And then if we do that we can think about how to regulate its timing. So anytime we haven't eaten for four to six hours, levels of epinephrine and cortisol are going to go up pretty substantially. There's an exception to that, which is if you are used to eating on the clock every two hours or every hour being half hour late, or being even 10 minutes late on that schedule will induce stress. Most of that psychological stress, but also the release of things like ghrelin that are going to make you hungry, 'cause they're on that eating clock. So one thing that many people do to great benefit is they follow a so-called circadian eating schedule. They eat only when the sun is up, they stop when the sun is down. More or less. The another way to think about this is they stop eating a couple hours before sleep and they eat more or less upon waking assuming that they're waking up more or less around the time of the sunrises, maybe plus or minus two hours. Okay. So sort of typical schedule. Now, let's say you decide to do what I do, which is I skip breakfast. I drink water, I delay my caffeine for 90 minutes to two hours, and then I drink my caffeine. And then my first meal is typically around lunchtime, 11:30 or 12:00. And yes, occasionally I throw back some almonds or walnuts or something earlier in the day. I do do that from time to time if I get hungry enough, or if I just happen to see them. I'm kind of a drive by eater, if I see blueberries or nuts or something I'm just going to pick them up and put them in my mouth. I try not do that off other people's plates, but I just have that habit of doing that from time to time. But typically I don't eat until about noon. So I've got a cortisol increase I've got my sunlight in the morning. So I'm getting a big pulse and energy early in the day. And yes, there's a little bit of agitation, I am hungry sometimes early in the day sometimes no, but my ghrelin system is used to kicking in right around noon. At the point where I eat as long as I don't eat carbohydrate in my case, I know that my epinephrine levels are going to stay pretty high. So for me, it's usually meat and salad, or something of that sort, or fish and salad. although I don't particularly like eating fish because of the taste, but I'm assuming low carb or ketones ish throughout the day. So I'm probably in a slightly elevated state of epinephrine and cortisol throughout the day. Some of you are fasting even longer. You're pushing out till 4:00 PM or 8:00 PM, or maybe you're even fasting around the clock. Anytime you're fasting you're increasing epinephrine and cortisol release. You can do all the meditation in the world to keep your mind calm, but you are closer to that edge of stress. And you're closer to that edge of peak stress. So that's something that's just important to understand the description about comfort foods and cortisol was one of kind of an extreme case where cortisol systems kick over to a positive feedback loop. But we all eat to suppress cortisol and epinephrine. When we're hungry cortisol and epinephrine create an agitation so we go seek food. When we ingest food typically if it includes carbohydrate, there's a blunting of cortisol. There's a blunting of epinephrine in the bloodstream. If you've ever had too much coffee to drink and you go and have a couple of pieces of bread, you will feel the... You might describe it as the caffeine getting soaked up out of your system, but what you're doing is you're elevating blood glucose which is more or less saturating the effect of caffeine in your system. Not completely, but it's going to have that effect. If you're very stressed and you sit down to eat something it will calm you down. Yes. Because some of the blood that goes to your stomach but more so because of these effects in blunting cortisol and epinephrine. So the important point here is that if you want to be alert you can do that by way of not eating. Of course, please ingest fluids. I know some people water fast out there. I am yet to see good science on water fasting and why that can stimulate stem cells, or people love the idea of after the Nobel prize was given for autophagy and this idea that our cells clean up debris in senescent cells, yes, that's true. But the idea that water fasting is going to promote that, I find rather amusing. Please send me the data if you know of some great study in a decent journal, but pretty much this is something I hear about. I don't think water fasting is a good idea, nor should you be drinking so much water that you kill yourself. You can actually drink enough water that you die. So I think ingesting water in healthy amounts is a good thing, stay hydrated. But if you want to be alert stay hydrated, caffeine may or may not be in your regimen, but fasting will make sure that your levels of energy are up and you will be primed very well for doing a protocol of the sort that we talked about earlier in this episode. Of breathing, or cold exposure, or exercise to get that increase in the immune system function. And if you do that after learning after trying to learn something, it will increase learning for that particular set of information, whether or not it's motor, or language, or whatever it happens to be. Mathematics, programming. So fasting is a tool for many reasons, it can increase growth hormone, et cetera. But today I'm talking about fasting as a tool to bias your system toward more epinephrine adrenaline release and toward more cortisol release but still low enough that it's not chronic stress, that it's not causing negative health effects. But please know that if life is very, very stressful if you're experiencing lots of stressors and you're chronically fasting, you are positioning yourself toward a greater likelihood of being chronically stressed in the ways that are negative. Negative effects on the reproductive access, lower testosterone and estrogen. Negative effects on you're hair will turn gray, there's reasons for that, Your sleep will suffer. Your immune system will suffer. So I think while it's nuanced our discussion today about epinephrine and cortisol increasing energy and immunity are designed to help you understand when you should be doing certain things. When you should throttle back. When you might want to kick up your adrenaline a bit, if you're suffering from low energy because you're just kind of feeling down and a little bit under activated, well then the practices of ice baths and intense breathing, et cetera, could be very beneficial so might fasting. But if you're feeling exhausted and burnt out sort of drained and stressed well then fasting or doing a lot of cold exposure, or doing a lot of intense exercise is driving you further and further into chronic stress. So because I don't have a saliva test or a blood test, or God forbid an earwax test to measure your cortisol as we're engaging in this discussion together, you have to gauge for yourself whether or not you are in a state of under activated and need more epinephrine and cortisol, or whether or not you are over activated, in terms of cortisol and epinephrine. And you need ways to buffer those ashwagandha, Maybe it should be a warm mellow bath not an ice bath. So one has to learn how to regulate these hormones with behavior, with nutrition, perhaps with supplementation. And then of course there are prescription drugs, and I always leave these to the end because A, I'm not a medical doctor I'm not prescribing anything. I'm a professor, I'm professing a number of things that you can decide for yourselves what to do with or not. But of course there are prescription drugs that can increase cortisol or decrease cortisol in cases like Cushing's syndrome, which if you have that diagnosed, you should talk to a physician. You should talk ideally to a endocrinologist but to a physician of some sort, board certified physician. There are drugs that can be used to treat injury like corticosteroids, that you can inject to reduce inflammation injury, but they are cortisol. So they're going to bias you towards more stress in other domains. Remember cortisol can cross the blood brain barrier so you're going to be more prone to psychological stress. I also want to mention again, that I think there's great benefit to having a practice that perhaps you do every other day, but if you can't maybe every third day or every other day of deliberately increasing your adrenaline in your body while learning to stay calm in the mind, so that you learn to separate the brain body experience. You know, we hear so much about how beneficial it is to unify the brain and body, that we're all out of touch with our brain and bodies. I particularly dislike claims like that or statements like that because there's great power as we learned today in having your body activated by some sort of stimulus, cold water or even psychological stress, but learning to stay calm in your mind. I should just remind you that most of the negative effects on your life and on the lives of others are due to people perhaps you I hope not being unable to regulate their mind when they have high levels of adrenaline in their body, either 'cause they read something on a text or a comment section, of course that never happens to me, but it may happen to you. Of course it happens to me, but the idea is to stay calm in your mind so that then you can regulate your action, right? And so I think that there are these practices that one can develop over time that are really straight forward and zero costs, right? You could find any number of ways to increase your adrenaline and stay calm. And we tend to focus on things like exercise as the way that we get our energy up. But today, again I'm talking about deliberately increasing adrenaline while staying calm mentally, because that has great utility when the adrenaline hits through unwanted events, through things that we didn't seek out. So the ability to regulate adrenaline cortisol is about inducing them deliberately when you want to push back on infection, potential infection from bacteria viruses. It's about pulling back on adrenaline and cortisol, maybe through the use of supplementation but certainly through proper use of light and sleep and mental tools that we talked about as well when they are chronically elevated. It's about training your system, not just to be unified at brain and body, which sounds great until you're stressed and then that's terrible. It's really about having a deliberate dissociation between the adrenaline response from the adrenals and the adrenaline response from the brainstem. So once again, we've covered a ton of material. I hope right now, you're thinking, okay, am I in state of chronic stress? Am I under activated? Or could I afford to increase my levels of adrenaline cortisol to improve my relationship to my immune system and to energy, neural energy. If you like the information that you heard today and you want to remember it, well, then at the end of this episode, perhaps you go do something to increase your level of adrenaline. And now you know what some of those things are, because it will help you retain the information, or you could apply that to anything else that you learn or experience of course. And I hope that you'll think about some of the ways in which cortisol and adrenaline are not good or bad, that stresses in good or bad but short-term stress is healthy. Alertness and energy is healthy even if it puts you at the edge of agitation, that's an opportunity to learn how to control these hormones better. And I hope that if you're in a state of chronic stress that you'll do things to start tamping down some of that stress and that you realize that your nervous system and your hormone system are linked, but they're linked in ways that you can control, that we don't have to be slaves to our hormones. And certainly not the hormones that cause us stress, we can learn to control those both to the benefit of our body and benefit of mind. If you're learning from this podcast and you like the information that you're learning, please subscribe on YouTube, that really helps us, and in addition if you could hit the notification button, that will let you know when we release new episodes. Now we release them every Monday morning but in addition to that we are starting to really short clips now and again as well as some special content. So hit the subscribe button please and hit the notifications button. If you haven't already subscribed on Apple and or Spotify, please do that. You can certainly subscribe to all three if you like, and on Apple you can give us a five-star review as well as leave us a review. On YouTube is the place to leave us comments and feedback as well as suggestions for future episodes. We do read all the comments and I know many of you are anxiously awaiting particular topics and episodes, and we will eventually get to them all, I'm not going anywhere. And we do want to be thorough about every topic. Today we rounded out the discussion about hormones. We aren't going to continue with that topic any longer, we are moving to a new topic segment for an entire month or so. If you know of other people that you think could benefit from the information on this podcast, or that you think would enjoy listening to it please forward it along to them, we'd really appreciate that. Another great way to support us is to check out our sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning of the podcast. We also have a Patreon, it's patreon.com/andrewhuberman, there you can support the podcast at any level that you like. I should mention that I will be answering some questions that come up frequently in the comment section on YouTube in Instagram Lives every once in a while. I am on Twitter @hubermanlab. I'm on Instagram, also @hubermanlab. And on Instagram from time to time coming up I'm going to be discussing answers to your common questions in these Instagram Lives and I will make sure that they're recorded. So you can check those out, please follow our Instagram. If you are not already doing that and check out our Twitter if you're on Twitter. I covered a lot of different types of tools today, behavioral tools, et cetera. But I did mention supplements. For those of you that are interested in supplements we've partnered with Thorne, T H O R N E, because we believe them to have the highest levels of stringency and quality in terms of supplement production, in terms of amounts of supplements in their different formulations, et cetera. If you want to check out the supplements that I take and you want to get a discount on Thorne supplements you can go to thorne.com/u/huberman and you can get 20% off any of the supplements that I take, or any of the supplements that Thorne sells for that matter. That's thorne.com/u/huberman to get 20% off anything that Thorne makes. Thank you for joining me for what I hope was an informative discussion and an actionable discussion about how to increase energy and the immune system by way of cortisol and adrenaline epinephrine. I really appreciate your willingness to learn new topics as well as to embrace and think about new tools and whether or not they're right for you. And as always, thank you for your interested in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 330 ---
Video ID: x7qbJeRxWGw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x7qbJeRxWGw
Title: How to Control Your Metabolism by Thyroid & Growth Hormone
Published: 2021-04-26 12:00:33 UTC
Description:
This episode I discuss metabolism and how our thyroid hormone and growth hormone control our metabolism. I also clarify that metabolism isn't just about burning energy, it’s about converting energy from different sources into fuels for building and repairing our tissues such as muscle, brain, and tendons and mobilizing energy from body fat storage. I discuss the role of iodine, selenium, and salt for thyroid health, and how specific exercise protocols, amino acids and temperature can dramatically shift levels of growth hormone release in waking and in sleep. I also describe the current landscape of prescription compounds, peptides and other factors for changing levels of thyroid and growth hormone, and some of their risks. Throughout the episode, mechanism and tools grounded in specific mechanisms are discussed. Thank you for your interest in science!

#HubermanLab #Metabolism #Hormones

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website: https://hubermanlab.com
Join the Neural Network: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Link to recent study on thermal stress and hormones:
Endocrine Effects of Repeated Hot Thermal Stress and Cold Water Immersion in Young Adult Men: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33845653

Timestamps
00:00:00 Introduction
00:06:05 Thyroid & Growth Hormone
00:08:44 Food Shapes: Do They Matter?
00:11:43 Stevia: Naming & Impact 
00:13:30 Metabolism 101: Your Brain the Furnace
00:17:33 Releasing Hormones From Your Brain, Stimulating Hormones from Your Pituitary
00:21:04 Thyroid Hormone’s Real Effects: Growth, Repair and Energy Consumption of Tissues
00:22:45 Iodine, L-Tyrosine & Selenium: The Trio Essential For Thyroid Function
00:26:05 How Much Iodine Do We Need? By Food, Supplement or Ocean Air
00:28:09 Selenium For Thyroid: Brazil Nuts & Other Valuable Sources
00:33:05 Selenium For Pregnancy, Prostate Cancer Risk, Acne
00:35:20 “Clean Eating” Downsides: Cruciferous Vegetables, Leeching Iodine
00:39:00 Other Benefits of Iodine: Reducing Inflammation 
00:41:00 Why & How Increased Thyroid Increases Metabolism
00:42:12 What To Eat To Support Your Brain 
00:43:00 Hyperthyroidism (Too Much) & Hypothyroidism (Too Little)
00:44:35 Menstruation: Thyroid Carbohydrate & Sugar Craving 
00:45:33 Ketogenic Diet & Its Effects On Thyroid, Rebound Weight Gain
00:48:39 Growth Hormone: What, Why & How
00:51:18 Growth Hormone (GH) Changes Across The Lifespan & Risks of GH Therapy
00:53:40 How To Powerfully Increase Growth Hormone: Know The Natural TriggerS
00:54:49 Not Eating Within 2hrs of Sleep: Keep Blood Glucose Low(ish) At Sleep
00:55:43 Delta Wave Brain Activity Is the Trigger For Growth Hormone Release
00:58:25 LOW Doses of Melatonin Supplementation For Increasing GH Release
01:01:00 Book: Altered Traits, Binaural Beats? Delta Waves Access  
01:04:35 Specific Types & Duration of Exercise That Stimulate Growth Hormone & Warmups
01:08:40 Keeping Low Blood Glucose & Ensuring A Cool Down For Two Phase GH Release 
01:10:36 Sex Differences For WHEN During Exercise Growth Hormone and IGF-1 Release Occurs: Males Have To Last Longer
01:14:10 Supplements That Increase Growth Hormone 100-400% (or more): Arginine, Ornithine
01:18:20 Arginine & Exercise Together Can Be Counter-Productive
01:19:50 L-Citrulline Better For Arginine Than Arginine Itself (?!); & Blood Pressure Caution
01:23:09 Growth Hormone Changes Across The Lifespan: No One Escapes
01:26:00 Heat (& Cold) for Triggering Extremely Large Increases In Growth Hormone
01:29:20 Specific Heat Protocols For Increasing Growth Hormone: Up To 16-Fold (?!)
01:34:30 2021 (New) Study: Heat Increases GH, & Lowers Cortisol, No Effects On Testosterone, DHEA Or Prolactin
01:36:00 Prescription Growth Hormone, & Emerging Peptides Therapeutics, Secretagogues Etc.
01:42:25 Synthesis, Summary Of Actionable Steps For Increasing GH and Thyroid Hormone
01:44:00 Zero Cost & Other Ways to Support Our Podcast; & Thank You!

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac https://www.blabacphoto.com

The Huberman Lab podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Transcript Language: English (United States)
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [guitar music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Four Sigmatic. Four Sigmatic is a wellness company that makes mushroom coffee. And if you're asking yourself, why would you want to put mushrooms in coffee? First of all, let me tell you these are not psychedelic mushrooms and no, the coffee doesn't taste like mushrooms. The coffee is delicious and you don't taste mushrooms at all. I know this because I've been using Four Sigmatic coffee and been stocking it in my laboratory for several years now long before I ever had the podcast or Four Sigmatic was a sponsor. The two kinds of mushrooms that are in Four Sigmatic coffee our lion's mane and chaga mushrooms, both of which have been shown to have a slight anxiolytic effect to reduce anxiety. And lion's mane has also been shown in several studies to lower the symptoms of depression just slightly. Although I wouldn't consider it a treatment for depression, that's an attractive benefit, as well as have some effect at offsetting cognitive decline. Albeit slightly, the effects were real in the studies that I've found. So if you'd like to try Four Sigmatic, you can go to foursigmatic.com/huberman. That's F-O-U-R-S-I-G M-A-T-I-C dot com slash Huberman. And if you do that, you'll get 40% off your order plus free shipping on mushroom coffee bundles. That's foursigmatic.com/huberman for up to 40% off and free shipping. Today's episode is also brought to us by Blinkist. Blinkist is an app that has thousands of nonfiction books condensed down to just 15 minutes of key takeaways that you can read or listen to. I'm a big reader and I'm a big consumer of nonfiction. And most of the time I consume books in their traditional form like a book where you flip the pages and so forth. I also listen to full length audio books. However, over time we know that we forget lots of things. And even though sometimes I think I got all the critical information from a book, when I listen to Blinkist and I get the 15-minute rundown, either an audio or in written form, what I find is there key points that oftentimes I missed. And so it's a great way for me to both jog my memory and to bring forward ideas that I hadn't considered previously. They have thousands of nonfiction titles and some really terrific ones in the science category. For example, David Eagleman's book "Livewired" which came out recently as a book I read in full length form and I've listened to the Blinkist version of it as well. "Livewired" is a book about neuroplasticity. The brain's ability to change in response to experience. I get so many questions and requests for books about neuroplasticity. In my opinion, "Livewired" is the most recent and up-to-date and the best one to date. So that's there. David Sinclair's book "Lifespan." David, as many of you know, is a professor of genetics at Harvard Medical School. "Lifespan" is this terrific book about aging as a disease and the future and present of longevity treatments. Very interesting book. As well as Matt Walker's book, "Why We Sleep." Matt, of course, is a professor at UC Berkeley and "Why We Sleep" is a terrific book about why we sleep, the science of sleeping, and things you can do to improve your sleep. All of those are on Blinkist. But with Blinkist you get unlimited access to their massive library of nonfiction. If you'd like to try Blinkist, right now they have a special offer just for our audience, just for Huberman Lab Podcast listeners. You can go to blinkist.com/huberman and you can try Blinkist free for seven days, so that's zero cost, and you'll get 25% off your new subscription. That's Blinkist, B-L-I-N-K-I-S-T dot com slash Huberman to get a free seven day trial and get saved 25% off when you sign up but only if you go to blinkist.com/huberman. This episode is also brought to us by Munk Pack. Munk Pack is a company that makes keto-friendly snacks that taste incredible but have just one gram of sugar or less. As I've said before on this podcast, I am not in ketosis. I'm not ketogenic. I don't advocate or follow any one particular diet. For me, what works is to fast in the early part of the day and to eat low carb and keto-ish throughout the day. That's for alertness and attention. So I can work and focus and I don't feel sluggish or brain fog. And then at night and in the evening is when I tend to eat my carbohydrates to aid the transition to sleep. That's what works for me. Munk Pack bars are a terrific snack whether or not you're keto all the time, whether or not you're low carb, or even if you're not, they are absolutely delicious. And I don't say that lightly. I'm not a big fan of bars in general. Most bars to me tastes like a combination of, you know, a metal bumper mixed with some cardboard and some lawn trimmings and some artificial sugar. Munk Pack bars, when they were sent to me, I was like, all right, I'll try them. I tried it. Like, uh-oh, this is a problem 'cause I liked them very, very much. And when I say it's a problem, it really is a problem. I actually keep the Munk Pack boxes in my basement so that I don't tear through them all at once. I'm a huge fan of the caramel sea salt flavor. It's delicious. Just talking about it makes me hungry for one. But they also have sea salt, dark chocolate, peanut butter dark chocolate. They're terrific. In addition to being keto-friendly, they're also gluten-free, plant-based, non-GMO, no soy, trans fat, sugar alcohols or artificial colors. So all the bad stuff that you don't want. And as I mentioned before, they're keto, less than one gram of sugar. If you want to try Munk Pack, you can go to munkpack.com. That's M-U-N-K Pack dot com. And enter the code Huberman at checkout and you'll get 20% off your first purchase of any Munk Pack product. That's M-U-N-K-P-A-C-K dot com and enter the code Huberman at checkout to get 20% off your purchase. This month, we've been talking all about hormones, which are these absolutely incredible chemicals in our brain and body. They impact our entire lifespan. So from the time that we are in the womb, they're controlling the development of our brain and our bodies. After we are born, they're still controlling the development of our brain and bodies. And I did say development, and that's because, contrary to what most people think, development lasts the entire lifespan. From the time you're conceived until the time you die, you are developing, you are changing. And hormones are constantly updating and changing the different functions of your body. They have two major kinds of effects. One are immediate effects, so they can actually bind to or kind of park in parking spots on cells and impact all sorts of things like the growth of cells, et cetera. They also can control gene expression. This is the way that hormones during puberty control body hair growth and breast development and growth of muscles and limbs and height and all sorts of things. They are incredible. We've talked about testosterone and estrogen. We talked about insulin and glucagon and some of the other things. Today, we are going to talk about metabolism. Mainly going to talk about thyroid hormone and growth hormone and some other related pathways. I'm going to explain to you the logic of how thyroid hormone and growth hormone work. It will become obvious why I've paired thyroid and growth hormone together in the same episode. And I will of course talk about tools that you can use to elevate or reduce thyroid hormone. There are cases where people want to reduce thyroid hormone. I will talk about tools that you can use to elevate growth hormone. There are rare cases where people want to reduce growth hormone. Most people are interested in increasing growth hormone. So today is going to be rich with information, rich with actionable tools. And as always, the idea is to spell out an organizational logic so you can come away from this episode and in fact the entire month on hormones, really understanding at some level what these things we call hormones are and how they work. And that's really to arm you to encounter information going forward, whether or not it comes from me or from somebody else, a book or a course, someplace else online to make sense of how to work with these incredible chemicals we call hormones. Before we begin to talk about thyroid and growth hormone and how our metabolism works and how to control metabolism, I want to answer a few questions that I received from you from the audience. Every once in a while, someone will send me a quite earnest question about something they saw on the internet. And one of the things I've heard about quite a bit in the last couple of weeks as we've been talking about hormones and food intake and how those interact is this question of are certain foods particularly good for certain organs of the body? And can that be predicted on the basis of the shape of those foods? So first of all, I want to acknowledge the question as a valid one, because I see this every once in a while out there. People will say, well, you know, walnuts are in the shape of the brain and therefore they are good for your brain or, you know, a particular fruit like the beet often looks like a heart and it's good for your heart. And I certainly invite questions of all kinds, provided they're sincere questions. However, I am not aware of any science whatsoever supporting the idea that the shape of a given food or object for that matter is relevant to its functional role in the body in reference to biology. Now, beets contain something that we're going to talk about today. They contain a substance called arginine, which actually can control the dilation of blood vessels and arteries. So it has some relationship to heart and heart health. Walnuts contain various fatty acids that maybe, I want to underscore maybe, beneficial for certain aspects of brain health but there's no evidence whatsoever that the shape of the food itself is relevant. And, you know, I think what's happened is, is that people have gone out there and found foods that contain certain substances like carrots and vitamin A or walnuts and particular fatty acids or beets and arginine. And they've selected the foods that happen to be in the shape of the thing, the organ that the particular substance like vitamin A or fatty acids and so forth might benefit or support. But of course, there are many, many other sources of these nutrients that don't come from walnuts or from beets or from carrots. And so I guess the short way to put it is that the idea that the shape of some food is an indication of whether or not that food would be healthy for a particular organ in the body is absolutely unfounded. I don't know of any evidence for it and I'm not out to quash anybody's great love of these foods. I enjoy all the foods I just described, but the shape of things in the physical universe bears very little, if any, relevance to the nutrients that it contains and therefore the organs that it supports. So thank you for your question but if you see that out there, I don't even think you need to tell the person who's putting that information out into the world. I would just, you know, back away slowly. One other thing, before we move into today's material, last episode, I talked about the problems with emulsifiers in highly processed foods and the way that they can strip the mucosal lining of the gut. And they can limit the signaling of hormones like CCK that can signal to the brain satiety, the signal to stop eating. And then we got into a discussion about artificial sweeteners and I threw out Stevia as an artificial sweetener. And several people reached out to correct me that Stevia is not an artificial sweetener, it is a noncaloric sweetener, and you are correct. I lumped artificial and noncaloric sweeteners together. And thanks to many of you that also sent me some references. It does not appear that Stevia can negatively impact the gut microbiome. It does seem unique among noncaloric sweeteners. There are probably others out there. The other thing that we discussed is how Stevia can lead to slight increases in blood glucose but can also improve insulin management just slightly, probably cancels to zero in terms of its impact on blood glucose, provided it's not at concentrations that are super, super sweet. Ingestion of anything that's very sweet, whether or not contains calories or not, artificial or not, will create an insulin response. In fact, just walking past a bakery and smelling delicious baked goods can increase your insulin secretion. And so we just want to point that out. Thank you for the information and the references that you found. Please send additional ones if you do find them. And I appreciate that you allow me to make corrections every once in a while I must speak here and the opportunity to make corrections keeps us all on the same page. And please do keep any feedback that you have about particular things I cover here coming my way. There is so much interest in metabolism. We hear about having a high or a low metabolism. There are some people out there who would like to reduce their metabolism. They simply can't eat enough to maintain their weight. Most people, however, struggle with the opposite issue. They struggle to maintain a healthy weight and/or their metabolism is too low. Now, there are a variety of reasons why metabolism can be low. Today, we are going to talk about two hormones, thyroid hormone and its related pathways and growth hormone and it's related pathways, which arguably are the two hormones and two systems in the body that are most significant for setting your overall level of metabolism. Before we dive into those, I just want to cover a little bit of what metabolism is. And I want to talk about which organs in your body use the most energy. So metabolism is the consumption of energy, not necessarily eating, but it's the use of energy in the cells of the body for growth of tissues, for repair of tissues, and also just for day-to-day maintenance of function. A good example of maintenance of function would be your brain. Most of your metabolic needs, your so-called basal or resting metabolic needs are for your brain, for thinking. If you were to just sit in a bed all day and do nothing but think, that consumes about 75% of your metabolic needs. Now, there's also moving around. If you have a job that requires a lot of heavy labor or lifting things or you're a new parent and you're carrying kids around and you're going up and down the stairs or back and forth to the refrigerator for formula, et cetera, well then you're burning more energy, burning more calories. But even if you are very physically active, unless you're an ultra marathoner or a marathoner, chances are that 75% of your metabolic needs are coming just from your brain. And that's because neurons consume a lot of energy. Neurons, of course, are just the nerve cells of your brain. So these two hormones, thyroid hormone and growth hormone, we think of as related to metabolism of things in the body, keeping body fat low, and keeping muscles strong, and tendons strong and repairing themselves, et cetera, but they are also key for brain function, for the ability to maintain cognitive function throughout the lifespan. So the big theme I'd like to introduce is that metabolism isn't just about losing weight but having a high metabolism, provided it's not too high, is great. It means that you will have more lean tissue, more bone and muscle and less adipose tissue, fat. And we know that that's healthy. How much fat and how much muscle? Well, that varies, and the numbers on this are always shifting. But in general, muscle and its related tissues burns more energy than does adipose tissue or fat. And the water in your body doesn't consume any energy. So metabolism can be increased simply by adding muscle to your body and reducing fat or adjusting the ratio of the two. But regardless, even if you're not interested in changing body composition, these two hormones, thyroid hormone and growth hormone, are super important for metabolism of all kinds, including tissue repair after injury, including maintaining cognitive function and well-being and the ability to think clearly as you age, offsetting dementia and so forth. So the big theme here really includes the previous episodes. You don't have to have seen those episodes but for the last three episodes and today as well, we've been talking about hormones, these substances that are released from one location in the body that go and act other locations in the body. I'm going to tell you how that works for thyroid and growth hormone. But now that you've heard about testosterone and estrogen and you're going to hear about thyroid and growth hormone, I want you to realize that there's a repeating logic. First of all, there are neurons in your brain in an area called the hypothalamus, which just means it's below the thalamus, hypo. It sits at the base of your brain, in the front, it's part of the forebrain. So it's more or less above the roof of your mouth, maybe about a centimeter or so, and then about a centimeter forward in most people. And neurons in the hypothalamus release hormones that are called releasing hormones. So we've talked in previous episodes about, for instance, gonadotropin-releasing hormone. So those are a little neurons that then signal another brain area called the pituitary to release other hormones. Today, we're going to see this again. In the brain, you have neurons that release thyrotropin or thyroid-releasing hormone. You also have growth hormone-releasing hormone. So anytime you hear releasing, chances are those are neurons that are in your brain and they extend little wires we call axons into your pituitary and the pituitary releases a bunch of hormones into the bloodstream. And the pituitary releases things that most often have the name of stimulating hormone because they stimulate organs. So in keeping with the theme of thyroid hormone, you have thyroid-releasing hormone in the brain, tells the pituitary to release thyroid-stimulating hormone and then the thyroid, which we'll talk about in a moment, releases thyroid hormones. In the testosterone and estrogen episode, we talked about how you have gonadotropin-releasing hormone, there's the releasing again, up in the brain. Remember, releasing hormone comes from the brain. Then you had things like luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone, which were in the pituitary and those traveled to the ovaries or the testes and acted on those tissues, okay? So please try and embed this logic. If you hear the word releasing hormone, it's coming from the brain, and that makes it actionable in certain ways that we'll return to later. In addition, the pituitary is letting go of all these hormones into the bloodstream that are stimulating different tissues. So for thyroid, it's thyroid-stimulating hormone. And then it goes to the thyroid. And the thyroid is a little butterfly-shaped gland that's right around the Adam's apple. If you want to see yours, not directly 'cause it's got skin over it, what you would do is you'd take a sip of water, you'd look in the mirror and you'd swallow. And the thing that moves up and down, that is your thyroid. Now, some people call it your Adam's apple because it sits right near this protrusion in the trachea, which is the Adam's apple. No matter, whether or not you're male, female, or regardless of what your chromosomal background is, everyone has an Adam's apple. It tends to be more pronounced in people that got a surge of testosterone early in development because it has a testosterone sensitivity to it. And that actually controls the timbre, the so-called deepness of the voice. So the thyroid gland sits right there and it's got four little bumps behind it called the parathyroid gland. And it releases two hormones into the blood to stimulate different tissues and their metabolism. And those hormones are called T4 and T3. So if this is already sounding like a lot of information, it's really easy, I promise. Releasing hormone comes from the brain. Stimulating hormone comes from the pituitary. And in this case, we're talking about the thyroid, binding up that stimulating hormone and saying, oh, I need to release something. And it releases T4 and T3. And guess what? You can basically forget about T4. T4, it's not completely inactive, it has some roles, but T3 is the one that's more or less active. Now, what does thyroid hormone do? A lot of people think, oh, thyroid, it's like metabolism and people who are hyperthyroidal have bulging eyes and are real thin and people who have hypothyroid are overweight and their eyes are like are, you know, half closed or something. And indeed thyroid hormone controls a lot of the features of the face and the eyes. And it can control amounts of adipose tissue and so forth. But the main role of thyroid hormone, of T3, is to promote metabolism. And that doesn't just mean the consumption of energy, it means the utilization of energy, including the buildup of tissues. So it acts on all sorts of target tissues in the body. It acts on muscle, it acts on the liver, it acts on the cartilage, it acts on the bone. And it's not just involved in using energy, it's also converting energy. I do realize I said that twice. It's involved in taking fats and breaking them down into fatty acids and converting those into ATP, which is an important thing for cells to use energy. It's also involved in taking sugars and turning those into energy. And yes, it goes to adipose tissue to fat. We have different kinds of fat that we'll talk about today but it goes to white fat and it liberates or helps liberate some of the fats from those fat cells and use them for energy. And this is why higher thyroid is associated with leaner bodies. Lower thyroid is associated with less lean bodies. So one thing that's absolutely key and is actionable, we're right there already in discussing tools is iodine. Iodine comes from things in the ocean, right? And here are a couple of interesting facts about iodine. And then we'll talk about whether or not you should be supplementing iodine or not. First of all, iodine is most common in sea salt, in kelp and in seaweed. And most people can get enough iodine from the food they eat and/or the table salt they consume. Almost all table salt from all over the world, regardless of where you are, contains iodine. The thyroid needs iodine in order to produce thyroid hormone. And you need sufficient levels of thyroid hormone, not too much, but you need it. So chances are you are getting enough iodine. Although, you might not, especially those of you following a particularly, quote, unquote, clean diet, might not be getting enough iodine. Here's the deal with iodine. Iodine combines with an amino acid that we've talked about before called L-tyrosine. L-tyrosine comes from meat, from nuts. There are some plant-based sources as well. It is the precursor to dopamine. But in the thyroid, iodine combines or works with L-tyrosine to produce T3 and T4, the thyroid hormone. So you absolutely need sufficient iodine, you need sufficient L-tyrosine, and then you also need something else, which is called selenium. And we'll talk about selenium in a moment. So there's a condition that shows up in little pockets in the world. It's not super common, meaning it's not very widespread, but in certain areas that are far away from the ocean, at one point, this was historically in the Midwestern states of the United States, in some mountain regions of other countries, in some areas of Africa that were far from the ocean, people would get extremely swollen bulges in their necks. And this was called goiter. And the reason they were getting those swollen bulges is because the thyroid itself was hypertrophying. It was growing in an attempt to churn out more thyroid. And because it was getting a lot of stimulating hormone from the pituitary. And I don't want to go too far off track here but as you recall, the brain and the pituitary are paying attention in a cellular sense to the levels of hormones in the blood. And when those hormones get too high, they shut off the stimulating hormone, they shut down the signal to make more, kind of like a thermostat. When the levels are too low, like there's not enough testosterone in the bloodstream or there's not enough estrogen, the brain will continue to push out the signal to make more. Similarly, if there's not enough thyroid circulating or there's not enough iodine to make thyroid, therefore not enough thyroid hormone circulating, the thyroid gland itself is not getting shut down. There's tons of stimulating hormone and releasing hormone coming from the brain, like release, release, release, and there's no way they can make thyroid hormone and so the gland just gets bigger and bigger and bigger. And so people get goiter. This is one of the reasons why table salt has iodine in it. Although there are other foods that have iodine in it as well. So how much iodine do you need? Well, you don't need a whole lot. Some people who are hypothyroidal might, and I want to emphasize might, you absolutely should talk to your doctor. This is a serious matter. Anytime you're talking about hormones or manipulating levels of thyroid, you absolutely want to talk to your doctor. Some people benefit from supplementing iodine. It is contained in most salts. It's in Himalayan salt, not always, but often. I know these days, there's a lot of excitement about pink salts and sea salts and what, you know, they're kind of artisan salt thing has kind of taken off in the foodie land, which is great. Some of them are actually quite tasty. You can just take it directly if you like the taste of salt. But iodine can be supplemented through things like kelp and seaweed and kelp tablets. Now, if you are hyperthyroidal, you make too much thyroid, that actually can be a problem. So really, the best way to figure this out is to get your blood levels tested of thyroid hormone. But there's so much iodine in the ocean that believe it or not people that live near the coast can actually just absorb it through the air, just by breathing ocean air. So that gives you a sense of just how little iodine you actually need to consume in food or in salt. So if you're within a few miles of the ocean or you visit the ocean from time to time, you're probably getting plenty. It does have to come together, as I mentioned, with L-tyrosine, and this is why foods that contain L-tyrosine, and provided that you have sufficient iodine in your diet, and if you have sufficient selenium in your diet, does serve to increase your metabolism. And that again is for the growth and repair of tissues. And that's really important. It's not just about keeping your metabolism high so that you can be on the leaner side of things or adjust your body weight, excuse me, your body composition ratios the way you like. Repair of injuries, repair of brain tissue, clearance of any damage from neurons, clearance of any damage to the body is also going to depend on thyroid. Again, metabolism being this kind of rate of fuel consumption and use in the body, generally, not just about body mass indexes and things of that sort. So let's talk about selenium because it's really important. And even though most people are getting a lot of sufficient iodine, and most people are probably getting enough L-tyrosine. I'm guessing most people may not be getting enough selenium if their goal is to increase thyroid hormone, at least that's what the literature says. Without going into the biochemistry, selenium is important in order for thyroid hormone to be made because of the way that it allows L-tyrosine and iodine to interact. And the thing is most people aren't getting enough selenium because they don't eat foods that are high in selenium. Now, how much selenium you need will depend on where you live. It actually varies country by country. Some countries I found say that you should get 100 micrograms, some say 200, some say 155. The average was about 155 micrograms, the countries I looked at. People who are trying to increase thyroid levels might want to consume more selenium. And if you consume a vitamin, of course, you want to make sure if it has selenium that you're not overdoing it by consuming a lot of selenium rich foods either. But nonetheless, I think it's fair to say that most people probably could do well by ingesting slightly more selenium than they currently are. Although, of course, always talk to your doctor. Brazil nuts are the heavyweight champion of foods to get selenium from. It has very high concentrations of selenium. In just six or eight Brazil nuts contain something like 550 micrograms of selenium. It's also present in fish. So certain fish like yellowfin tuna, although nowadays whenever I mention tuna or shellfish, which is the other rich source of selenium, people will tell me immediately there are all sorts of issues around farm, not farm, mercury, et cetera. So I've never particularly liked eating fish 'cause of the way it tastes. So that's why I avoid it. But for those of you that like it, I'm sure you're much more skilled in knowing which fish to buy and which fish not to buy. Ham, of all things, contains a lot of selenium, for whatever reason pork does. I'm not a big consumer of pork. Beef has some selenium, but what's interesting if you look at the sources, you know, pork, beef, turkey, chicken, cottage cheese, eggs, brown rice, what you want to understand is that Brazil nuts, six to eight Brazil nuts has 550 micrograms of selenium. And all the other foods I mentioned at much greater portion size than equivalent to six to eight Brazil nuts, either by volume or by calories, they have something like 30 to 50 micrograms of selenium. So if you're not eating Brazil nuts, I'm guessing most people aren't, and you're not eating a lot of animal based foods, which I know many of you aren't, then you're probably not getting enough selenium. And again, you can have these levels measured or you can just check what you're consuming and figure out whether or not you're meeting the ration that you need in order to get healthy levels of thyroid. It is present in things like mushrooms, but again, in a bowl of mushrooms, you know, what is the equivalent to a bowl of mushroom is 12 micrograms of selenium. And if the daily ration is something in 100 to 200 range, again, look it up for the area you are. You can see really quickly why even though things like mushrooms and spinach and milk and yogurt and lentils and cashews, and now we're into the vegetarian segment of the list that I constructed, you're probably not getting enough selenium. So it's kind of an interesting thing. If you're an experimenter and you get the clearance from your doctor, you could try increasing your selenium levels and see how that impacts your metabolism. Again, Brazil nuts are probably going to be the most direct way to get sufficient selenium levels but because levels are so high in Brazil nuts, it also means that you could overdo it as well. I'm not really aware of what the consequences are of getting too much selenium, although you can get too much of anything and I'm guessing those consequences aren't good. I also want to mention that for children, their daily requirements of selenium are much lower, as low as 30 or 40 micrograms for kids 14 years or younger. And in some areas, I really want to underscore this, the amount of selenium that's recommended daily is as low as 55 micrograms. So it's not that you should be shooting for thousands or even high levels of hundreds of micrograms of selenium. And again, that's micrograms, not milligrams. So again, look into what you need but if you're somebody who's interested in keeping thyroid function healthy and productive, then you certainly want to make sure you're getting enough iodine, you're getting enough selenium and you're getting enough L-tyrosine. And it's interesting when you start looking at the various foods, especially highly processed foods, then you start to realize that perhaps many people, maybe you, are not. Not incidentally, selenium has some other effects on health that can be quite positive. And even though these don't relate to thyroid or growth hormone function specifically, I think you might want to know about them, given that we're on the topic of selenium. The first is that there are three studies, all of which showed very high efficacy for reducing the risk of something called preeclampsia, excuse me, preeclampsia. Preeclampsia is seizures that are related to blood pressure issues during or around the delivery of a new baby. And actually, it's a rare-ish condition but it actually can be quite deadly. And so the fact that selenium is important for offsetting preeclampsia risk is interesting. I don't know the exact mechanism and I'm guessing there are only a few of you out there that are either pregnant or thinking of conceiving soon, but that's worth noting. Obviously, anything related to pregnancy or lactation, especially talk to your doctor. I'm guessing that selenium is probably in a lot of prenatal formulas but that's one clear benefit of having sufficient selenium. The other is a reduced prostate cancer risk. There's a study showing that having sufficient selenium can reduce prostate cancer risk. And there is some evidence that if you consume foods from areas with soil that's low in selenium, that can be a problem. And last episode, we talked about all these issues related to soil quality, things that are making their way into food that are disrupting hormones and so forth. But having sufficient selenium from food could offset the low content in any soil. And so that apparently can reduce prostate cancer risk. It's a minor effect but it's a statistically significant one. And the other one is a reduction in acne, which is interesting. I'm guessing that that probably has to do with the thyroid hormone pathway because of the way thyroid hormone can impact the liver. And it turns out that the liver and various biochemical reactions in the liver can impact acne. And that's probably an episode all into itself but those are just some additional benefits of getting a sufficient selenium. Okay, so we're already deep into tools related to making sure that you have sufficient selenium, iodine, and L-tyrosine in order to make enough thyroid hormones that can support your metabolic processes in your liver, your muscles, your tendons, for whatever purpose, keeping your metabolism high, for body composition reasons or for healing, for keeping your brain working well. Earlier I mentioned, there are people who are following very clean diets. So these are people that consume no processed foods. You know, any starch they might eat is going to be maybe a rice or a grain or any protein they might consume is going to be either from, let's hope, from humanely raised animal sources or maybe they're pure plant-based. Believe it or not, those folks are actually very susceptible to low iodine because it turns out that diets that are very meat rich and don't have many vegetables, as well as diets that are very vegetable rich but don't have many meats or salts are at risk of lowering thyroid hormone by way of the iodine pathway and other pathways. And so let me try and simplify this for you. Chances are if people are doing the all-meat diet, they're not sprinkling, they're not wrapping those steaks in seaweed and they may or may not be supplementing with iodine. Chances are they're probably consuming iodine salt but their requirements go up if they're not consuming vegetables. People who are consuming vegetables is kind of interesting. We always hear that we should have our cruciferous vegetables and those are so important but there are actually substances, compounds within high quality cruciferous vegetables that can interfere with thyroid hormone function. So if you're eating a lot of that stuff, a lot of cabbages and just look up your other, I think broccoli is a cruciferous vegetable, and I won't read off the whole list, you could just put into the internet. But we're always told to eat a lot of the dark, leafy green stuff. Well, unless that dark, leafy green stuff is kelp or seaweed, chances are that we're not getting enough iodine unless we're adding salt to our food. And chances are that we may be lowering the total amount of thyroid that we're making, as well as the fact that in plant-rich diets, it's hard to get enough L-tyrosine and I don't want, you know, I'm not here to inflame any of the vegans or the carnivore folks. I don't take a stance either way on any of that. I'm just learning, trying to report the science. The point I want to make is your health is important. So if you are purely plant-based and you're eating a lot of cruciferous vegetables, make sure you're getting enough iodine. It does seem like the cruciferous vegetables can increase the need for further iodine. And same thing if you're purely on this all-meat diet or your keto, and you're not ingesting many vegetables. So I always thought that the cleaner the diet, the better, but it turns and probably that's true from the standpoint of, you know, hormone regulation, you know, estrogen and testosterone and other hormones. The highly processed foods really are terrible. There's so much evidence for that. The phthalates in plastics and the processed foods and the emulsifiers, all this stuff we talked about previous episode, but it does seem to be that people that are not getting enough iodine for whatever reason, really need to check out whether or not their iodine levels need to be increased because of the fact that they're consuming so many plants or so many meats and in some cases, plants that actually lower thyroid hormone. And not to beat a dead horse or cabbage, but there are a number of things that iodine can do that are positive that are sort of, they're related to thyroid, not directly, they're kind of offshoots of the thyroid pathway on their downstream of it, we would say, in terms of how they impact metabolic function. One of those is to reduce something called c-reactive protein. Some of you may have heard of CRP or c-reactive protein. C-reactive protein is something that you want to keep at modestly low levels. It's associated with inflammation and various forms of heart disease and even eye disease, macular degeneration. So it does appear that iodine supplementation or getting sufficient iodine from food, either works, is associated with reduced levels of c-reactive protein in the blood and an anti-inflammatory effect. And the anti-inflammatory effect brings us back to our old friend, interleukin 6. Remember, they're these inflammatory cytokines. They have many, many names because there are many, many of them. Interleukin 10 is the one that's anti-inflammatory. Interleukin 6 is the one that's inflammatory. Anytime you see IL-6, that usually means that there's an inflammatory response, there's a wound, there's inflammation of the brain, somebody is either sleep deprived or had a brain injury or they're dealing with some sort of infection. IL-6 is kind of a catch-all for inflammation. And it does appear that iodine supplementation can reduce circulating IL-6 associated with inflammation. So in that sense, iodine can have an anti-inflammatory effect. So by now, it should be abundantly clear. If you care about thyroid hormone, if you care about the pathways that it impacts like having a high level of metabolism, which I guess if for no other reason is attractive 'cause then you can eat more and still maintain a healthy body composition, but also for brain health, cognitive function, tissue repair, all that stuff, keeping c-reactive protein low, keeping IL-6 low, make sure you're getting enough iodine, selenium and L-tyrosine. If you're curious how thyroid actually increases the metabolism, allows you to eat more, et cetera. It relates to something we covered last issue, which is glucose. Remember when you eat something, blood sugar goes up, insulin is secreted from the pancreas and it makes sure that blood glucose doesn't go too high, which can damage tissues or too low, which can make you hypoglycemic. Thyroid increases glucose uptake by various tissues, in particular muscle and bone. It actually can increase bone mineral density, which is a really good thing. As you get older, injuries, when I say older, I mean basically 30 and older, the reason you can recover more quickly from injuries if you have a healthy thyroid and healthy thyroid pathways is because you can consume energy. That energy is diverted toward bone repair and muscle repair and cartilage repair. And so the way it does this again is by increasing ATP. But the whole idea here is that iodine, selenium, L-tyrosine, allow thyroid to be at healthy levels so that thyroid then can take glucose in the blood and divert it to tissues for it to be used, in particular your brain. And that's why these things that we're talking about, supplementing or getting from food, can actually improve or support brain function. People are always asking me, what is the food that I should eat for my brain? Like, are blueberries good for your brain? Or they do ask me, are walnuts good for your brain 'cause it looks like a brain? We talked about that earlier. The fact of the matter is what you need are nutrients that support hormones and biological pathways that support the brain. That's the way to think about it. And I realized when people ask, what should I eat to support my brain? That's basically what they're asking in short form. So keeping your thyroid hormone healthy at healthy levels that is, is going to be terrific for your brain because 75% of your metabolism is from your brain. The ability of your brain to use glucose or ketones for that matter is going to be aided by having healthy thyroid. So do the things, take the things, eat the things that are going to allow you to have healthy levels of thyroid hormone. I'm sure a number of you are out there wondering, do I have healthy levels of thyroid hormone? Those can be measured from the blood. There are some telltale signs of having really high thyroid or really low thyroid, and I could start listing those off. They're easy to find online as well. Things like bulging eyes, inability to maintain weight, shaky, anxiety, that's kind of hyperthyroidal, thinning of hair, this kind of thing. I don't want to get into diagnosing hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism. It's just impossible 'cause you're there and I'm here and we're kind of shouting back and forth through a tunnel of video and comments. If you're concerned about having excessively high or excessively low levels of thyroid hormone, absolutely look up what the symptoms are. Talk to your physician. And there are a number of good treatments. I didn't talk about prescription drugs that can improve symptoms related to hypo or hyperthyroid. Of course, they have synthesized thyroid. So if you don't make enough thyroid, you can take thyroid, it's by prescription. If you have too much thyroid, sometimes they'll take out the thyroid gland or they can administer drugs that will either block receptors or will interfere with some of the pathways from the brain to the pituitary or from the pituitary to the thyroid in order to adjust the thyroid hormone that way. So there are the big guns in terms of the treatments for different thyroid disorders but we're not talking about thyroid disorders, we're talking about how to get and maintain thyroid levels in healthy ranges and some straightforward ways to do that through diet and supplementation. There's also a lot of evidence that for people who menstruate, levels of thyroid hormone can fluctuate dramatically across the menstrual cycle. So that's really going to be a process of experimentation. I don't know that you could, you could, in theory, take blood at different phases of your cycle and figure out whether or not your thyroid hormone was excessively high or low at different phases of the cycle. That's going to be pretty tough to do. If you have an endocrinologist that's willing to do that with you, terrific. I think most people are going to have to figure out how supplementing the sorts of things that we talked about before, or getting them from foods relates to different aspects of their cycle. In general, the first half of the cycle before ovulation, people crave carbohydrates and sweets more and that makes total sense based on the biology of the menstrual cycle. Thyroid hormone is going to go up as you, as anyone, male or female, menstruating or not, increases more starchy carbohydrates. This is interesting because ketogenic diets have been shown to slightly lower thyroid levels. And that makes sense because in ketogenic diets, blood glucose levels are very low. And thyroid hormone is secreted in large part in proportion to how much glucose is in the bloodstream and how much that glucose, excuse me, needs to be regulated. So I'm not trying to demonize the ketogenic diet. I think it definitely has its place. There are 22 studies now showing that it can dramatically reduce blood glucose. And about a third of those show that thyroid hormone levels are slightly reduced, sometimes significantly, if not more, in the ketogenic diet that may explain, I want to highlight may explain the fact that when people go back to a more traditional diet if they've been on a ketogenic diet for a long time, that oftentimes they will gain weight very quickly as they bring carbohydrates back into their diet. Some people are cycling between ketogenic and non-ketogenic every three, four days. So-called cyclical ketogenic diet. Some people are staying ketogenic for long periods of time. Some people six days on, one day off. So there's a huge variation there. The point is that carbohydrates, starchy carbohydrates in particular, support the healthy production of T3 and T4. And so if you're very low carbohydrate, you're going to have a reduction in T3 and T4. And so if you're going to bring carbohydrates back into your diet, then you might want to do it more gradually. And for those of you that menstruate, and are craving carbohydrates in the early part of the cycle, that is actually associated with having a healthy cycle. If any of you have had a healthy cycle on a ketogenic diet, that would be interesting. Maybe let me know through the comments or point me in the direction of some research if you're aware of it. So as you can start to see, there's this really beautiful interplay between the different hormones, between insulin and glucose, between estrogen and thyroid, between thyroid and blood glucose and the ketogenic diet. It all starts to fit together in ways that make a lot of sense once you understand just kind of the core elements of what the hormones are and the variety of tissues that they work on. The simple version of this is if you haven't had a carbohydrate for a year, then your T3, T4 levels are going to be pretty low. And I'm sure there's some ketonistas out there. They're going to say, wait, no, thyroid hormone levels go up with keto. That might be true for other reasons, indirect reasons related to hormone pathways that are cascade from being in ketosis for long periods of time. Great. But for most people that don't consume any carbohydrate, T3, T4 are going to go down. And when they start to consume foods that require thyroid metabolism in order to work with, to metabolize, then weight gain can sometimes happen more quickly. So it's just something to consider. And it's something to work with carefully if you're going to be cyclic ketogenic, long-term ketogenic. And if you're not ketogenic, and you're consuming carbohydrates. And the three things that we talked about earlier, selenium, tyrosine and iodine, chances are unless there's an underlying condition there that your levels of thyroid are going to be in healthy range. Next, we're going to talk about growth hormone. Growth hormone has received a ton of attention in the last 20 years. I actually remember when it was for sequenced. This was a huge deal. There was a huge patent drama. I won't mention the universities of the people involved. There were companies and monster patents and payouts and it was really interesting. You can look that up online if you're interested in some of the scientific history. Growth hormone is a pretty straightforward one for you to understand now because it follows the exact same logic as thyroid hormone. In fact, their functions are so closely overlapping on the, you know, when we first look at the face of it that you're probably going to think, why do you have these two systems? So just very briefly, growth hormone-releasing hormone. So remember releasing means it comes from the brain, comes from the brain and tells the pituitary to release growth hormone, and then growth hormone is released into the bloodstream where it goes and acts on a ton of tissues, muscle, ligaments, bone, fat, et cetera, to increase metabolism. It sounds just like thyroid hormone. And they do work in parallel. And that's why we've lumped them together in the same episode. They increase metabolism and repair and growth of tissues. A conversation about growth hormone would be incomplete if we didn't talk about the kind of extremes. There are certain people who are born that don't make enough growth hormone, and they end up very short in stature. There are certain people who make a ton of growth hormone and they end up very, very large. They tend to have very large appendages. They have something called acromegaly. It's kind of like a ridging of the forehead. It's actually a bone ridge. They are giant. And it used to be called giantism. And most people of course are in a range of height and appendage length. That doesn't imply that there's a growth hormone disruption there. Growth hormone received a lot of attention after it was sequenced because that meant the opportunity to inject growth hormone and replace growth hormone that was lost. And there was actually a lot of cases of people taking their kids and trying to get them to be taller for whatever reason by injecting growth hormone. Today, we're going to talk about the things that anyone can do to increase growth hormone. And there are reasons why certain people would want to do that. People who overproduce growth hormone certainly would not want to do that. People who underproduce it would probably want to do that. People that make normal, quote, unquote, levels of growth hormone might want to do that as they age because during puberty and development, the pituitary is churning out tons of growth hormone. It's responsible for the growth, not surprising, of the body and all its features. Height, just being one of those. And so as we age, we make less growth hormone. And that is one of the reasons why we recover more slowly from injuries. It's one of the reasons why we accumulate body fat. And it's one of the reasons why our metabolism slows. And so growth hormone replacement therapy has been tremendously popular in the last 20 years, which is not to say it doesn't carry its problems, it does. Here's one of the major problems with injecting growth hormone. Not saying people shouldn't do this if the doctor has approved it or it's in keeping with their particular life goals, but growth hormone, if it's in levels that are too high, will cause growth of all tissues. So not just muscle, not just reduction in body fat by metabolizing, you know, by allowing fatty acids to be pulled out of storage and used for ATP, but it will also cause increase in growth of the heart and the lungs and the liver and the spleen. And so this is the concern with abuse of growth hormone. So we're not going to be talking about abuse of growth hormone. We will, however, talk about tools that anyone can use to increase levels of growth hormone. Some of them are behavioral, some of them are supplement-based and some of them interact with behaviors and supplements. And what's cool about the discussion about growth hormone is that the tools that exist out there to increase growth hormone are very actionable. Most people can do these without the need for any equipment or even any supplement. Although there are some supplement related themes for tools for growth hormone increase. And also the increases that one can get in growth hormone are substantial. So normally, when you talk about the difference between taking something as an exogenous substance like testosterone or estrogen versus using supplements or behaviors to increase them, you're talking about tenfold differences from, you know, administering the prescription compound. In terms of growth hormone, there are things that can increase growth hormone three, four, 500% or more. And even though that's a short-lived increase, they can have very powerful effects on metabolism and on repair of tissues. So let's talk about those. Okay, let's go step by step in terms of the things that anyone, perhaps everyone, should be doing in order to maintain healthy growth hormone levels or increased growth hormone levels. Unless you have overproduction of growth hormone, chances are these things are going to benefit to you. However, as always, I want to emphasize, talk to a doctor before you do anything, including remove any treatments. So anything you would add or take away, that's the responsibility of you and your healthcare provider, okay? I don't just say that to protect me, I say that to protect you. First of all, growth hormone is released every night when you go to sleep and it's released in the early part of sleep, during so-called slow-wave sleep. So the two conditions that have to be met in order for growth hormone to be secreted regularly for tissue repair, et cetera, are you need to get into slow-wave sleep that so-called deep sleep and you need blood insulin and glucose to be relatively low. So eating within two hours of sleep, excuse me, eating within two hours of going to sleep is going to suppress growth hormone release. That's very clear. However, some people are going to have problems falling asleep if they are too hungry. So you have to work with that and decide what you're going to eat. And when you're going to eat that thing so that you're not so hungry that you're having trouble falling asleep. The episodes on sleep that were covered in episodes two, three, and four of the Huberman Lab Podcast has, I believe, more tools there than you could ever want or make use of in terms of how to optimize sleep. So you can refer to those, if you like. So don't eat too close to sleep and then get into slow-wave sleep. And as I talked about in one of those earlier episodes, the first half of the night, slow-wave sleep and deep sleep predominate. The second half of the night, it's another kind of sleep, we call it REM sleep. So what is special about this early phase of sleep? This is how you should be thinking if you listen to this podcast. You should be thinking, okay, I hear that something is important, it's related, it's in the pathway, but mechanistically when we say get into slow-wave sleep, get into deep sleep, that's when growth hormone is secreted. The question you should be asking yourselves as scientists of yourselves is wait, why slow-wave sleep? What in particular about slow-wave deep sleep allows the pituitary to release growth hormone? Like, what is it? Because if you can understand that, if you can understand a little bit of mechanism, there are actually ways that you can increase the amount of growth hormone that you release both in sleep and out of sleep. So the answer is it's delta wave activity in the brain. Delta waves are these big giant waves of activity in the brain that correlate with slow-wave sleep as opposed to faster waves of activity that is associated with rapid eye movement sleep. So slow-wave sleep and the delta activity actually triggers the neurons in the brain, the releasing hormone, right? Growth hormone-releasing hormone neurons to signal to the pituitary. Now, how do I know this is true? And what can you do with this? Well, we know this is true because researchers have taken people and sleep deprived them, and they just asked, well, is it just one period of time every 24 hours and then the pituitary releases growth hormone? If that were the case, that would say that growth hormone is just released in a so-called circadian dependent way. Every 24 hours is the pulse of it, but no, it's always relating to slow-wave deep sleep and delta waves. And this is cool because what it means is that even if you're not measuring your brainwaves during sleep, which most of you probably are not, you might be measuring slow-wave sleep or deep sleep using a device like a Whoop or Oura. And even if you're not, what this means is that during the day, there's the potential to also increase growth hormone release if you can get the brain into the so-called delta waves. And it turns out there are things you can do in waking as well to increase growth hormone release. So we're going to talk about those next. But as a tool and to just really make sure that we put brackets around this, try and have blood glucose not too high. So if you do need to eat close to bed, you wouldn't want to eat anything that would increase blood glucose too much. Try not to eat too close to bedtime. Get into deep sleep early in the night. Get the growth hormone release. And understand that it's the delta waves of activity, the sweeping big waves of activity in the neurons that stimulate the brain to stimulate the pituitary. Because once you understand that, then you have something to anchor to in terms of thinking what are the things I can do in waking that will allow me to release more growth hormone which for most people is going to be a good thing. Several times before on this podcast, I've talked about the fact that I'm not a big fan of melatonin supplementation for most purposes. It might be helpful under conditions of jet lag. However, there are a lot of reasons why I personally don't like melatonin. It interacts with the reproductive hormones, testosterone and estrogen, and that whole access in ways that are unattractive, at least to me. It suppresses puberty during development. It's present in much, much higher doses in most supplements than one would normally make like a hundred fold, 300 fold. However, today I'm going to talk about an instance where very low levels of melatonin supplementation might actually be advantageous. And that is aiding the transition to the delta wave, slow-wave sleep I just described because that's the pattern of sleep and brainwave activity that triggers growth hormone release. So whereas most melatonin supplements are one milligram, three milligrams, 12 milligrams, this kind of thing, that is super physiological. There are some data showing that microgram, maybe 500 micrograms of melatonin, so half a milligram, can be beneficial in shifting the pattern of early night's sleep toward more of the slow-wave deep sleep delta activity and improving growth hormone release. Not a lot of studies but the ones that I saw are quality. They were done in subjects that, you know, both sexes, sufficient numbers, et cetera. So this is interesting. So if you're interested in melatonin supplementation, you might think about it just at very low levels. You know, hundreds of micrograms as opposed to the milligram dosages. Most of the ones out there are going to be in milligram dosages. So that's one way that some studies have shown that you can increase the amount of growth hormone that's secreted in early phases of sleep. Now, the delta wave activity and the slow-wave activity in the brain being very important for growth hormone release and growth hormone release being so important for metabolic functions and peeling away unwanted body fat and repairing tissues, et cetera, forces us to ask, well, what other things can we do in waking in order to increase growth hormone release? So let's start with the ones that have a potentially big effect but are a little bit harder to access. And for that, I want to point toward a book, which is really kind of interesting. It's not focused on growth hormone but the book is called "Altered Traits." This is the book. It's an excellent book, "Altered Traits" by Goleman and Davidson. "Science Reveals How Meditation Changes Your Mind, Brain, and Body." Very interesting book. For those of you that are interested in meditation, and perhaps those of you who are not, but are considering it, what they talk about in this book is the fact that meditation has two separate lines of effects. One of those lines of effects are things that change your state. So you're stressed. You sit down, you meditate and you relax and you go into a particular state. The other are the changes that occur over time and those are changes in trait. So personality can actually change with long bouts of TM meditation or repeated meditation. In any case, the reason we're talking about "Altered Traits" today is because certain types of meditation can get people's brains into states that very closely mimic slow-wave sleep. If you hear snoring in the background, Costello is, sounds like he's in slow-wave sleep. These big oscillatory snores that he's in 23.6 hours per day. So what this means is for people that are interested in increasing growth hormone, a meditation practice that allows you to get into these slow-wave delta type frequency activity in the brain may be very beneficial because as I mentioned before, that's what's gating growth hormone release. It's not just a circadian phenomenon, it's actually controlled by these brainwaves. I did look up binaural beats. I get so many questions about binaural beats and it's a really attractive idea, right? Binaural beats, for those of you don't know, you listen to one frequency of tone in one ear and another frequency of tone and the other ear, and then the brain essentially takes the average of the two or there's some other wiring in the brainstem that makes it not quite the average but it takes the average of the two for sake of discussion. And that frequency is what the brain entrains or maps onto. There are a lot of apps that are claiming that you can get the brain into delta waves using binaural beats. I could not find quality peer review studies supporting that, but I know there are a lot of fans out there of binaural beats. If you know of any literature that's independent of the company that makes the binaural beat technology, so unbiased research, please send it my way. But in "Altered Traits," Goleman and Davidson talk about the fact that people who do 20 minutes of sitting meditation per day can access these slow-wave sleep like brain states. Now, I've talked a lot on here about non-sleep deep rest, things like yoga nidra and hypnosis. I'm not aware that those will put people into slow-wave sleep per se, or delta waves per se. So we're really talking about 20 minutes of more traditional type meditation. Okay, so we've talked about very low doses of melatonin as a way to trigger delta waves and more growth hormone release in sleep. There's science to support that. We've now talked about a waking behavior of 20 minutes of sort of what I would call standard meditation or just sitting there, concentrating on one's breathing to try and access delta waves. Binaural beats, no science yet. Who knows? Maybe there's science to support it. If you're aware of it, let me know. Now, let's move to the things that one can do that have been shown to have what's, let's just be honest, pretty enormous effects on growth hormone release in waking. And these are things that are very actionable. One of the things that can have a dramatic effect on levels of growth hormone release in waking as well as in sleep the following night is exercise. But the key is the type of exercise and the duration. Now, there's a logic to this. There are hundreds, if not thousands of studies measuring growth hormone, both during or sometimes after exercise or the following night. And the conclusion that one takes away from all of these is that exercise has to be of particular duration and intensity in order to get growth hormone release. So first I'm just going to tell you what I found to be the maximum amount of growth hormone release as it relates to a particular form of exercise. The particular form of exercise is either weight training or it can be endurance training, but the endurance training and the weight training actually have to be limited to about 60 minutes, not much longer. Now, this is important because it's been shown over and over again that if one exercises too long with weights or endurance exercise, that cortisol levels go high enough that it starts to inhibit the testosterone and even the estrogen pathways. This is why I believe people who overexercise or exercise a lot can lose their menstrual cycles. They stop menstruating. It's why you get suppressions in testosterone if people train too long and too hard. The cutoff has always been, you know, 60 to 75 minutes of the hard work part. It's going to vary a lot from person to person, but in terms of growth hormone, the conditions that seem to lead to the greatest growth hormone releases are one, get warm. This is interesting, we're going to talk about temperature. So a proper warmup seems to accelerate the release of growth hormone once the hard work phase starts. So 10 minutes of warmup or so was the number that I extracted from all these studies. There's a beautiful review on this, by the way. Growth hormone responses of varying, excuse me, "Growth hormone, arginine and exercise." We'll talk about arginine in a few minutes. That's by Kanaley, K-A-N-A-L-E-Y. It was published in Current Opinion in Clinical Nutrition and Metabolic Care. The Current Opinion journals are generally of pretty high quality in terms of the reviews just because they tend to be pretty recent. And then the references therein are also quite good. So what does this mean? This means warm up. And when you say warm up, it doesn't mean just warm up the limbs and tissues that you're going to use so you don't get injured, actually warm the body. So there was actually some discussion about whether or not in cold winter months, people should wear like a stocking cap, bringing the conditions, making the room warm. So getting the body warm as a warmup seems to be important because temperature of the body seems to be an important condition or prerequisite for certain patterns of exercise to maximize growth hormone release. So it's really interesting to me. I have an obsession with how body temperature, light exercise and food interact. We're going right there with the fact that if you get warm, you bring up the body temperature a degree or two or maybe three, and then start exercise. It does appear that high-intensity exercise, but again as discussed in a previous episode, not exercise that brings muscles to failure but close to it. So if it's weight-bearing exercise, it would be getting close to that final repetitions where you can't complete them but not pushing through those or even going to failure but getting close leads to anywhere from 300 to 500% increases in resting growth hormone levels and 300 to 500% increases in growth hormone the following night when you go to sleep, which is incredible. Now, I want to dissect this properly. Okay, so one of the other conditions that seem to be important, again, was to have relatively low blood glucose. So it's looking a lot like the conditions you need for sleep in order to get maximum growth hormone release in sleep. So not having blood glucose too high or too low, that's a discussion unto itself. You want to have sufficient energy to do the exercise but getting warm, not having blood glucose too high or too low. So probably not eating too close to exercise or not in ingesting a lot of sugars during the exercise. That was supported by the fact that ingestion of a sports drink that contains caloric sugar immediately flat-line the growth hormone levels. So really interesting relationship between insulin, glucose and growth hormone. So then doing the training for anywhere from 60 to 75 minutes to maximize growth hormone release. And then the other interesting thing was that even after the exercise, taking body temperature back down to normal levels relatively quickly seemed to be associated with these big spikes in growth hormone. Otherwise, what would happen is you get these big spikes in growth hormone, but if the exercise went too long or if body temperature remained too high for too long, then you didn't get the second increase in growth hormone the following night, okay? So I hope I made that abundantly clear. Warm up well, get body temperature up, exercise 60 to 75 minutes. Don't go to absolute failure if your interest is in growth hormone release both during the exercise and later that night. And if you can bring body temperature back down to normal levels by cooling off, maybe cool shower or maybe ice pack or something, or maybe just turning off the heat in the room or going outside, whatever it is, then you increase the probability that you're going to increase growth hormone the following night as well. And again, these are big increases, 300 to 500%. It's almost like you're getting a second sleep during the day. But if the exercise is too hard, if body temperature stays too high for too long, you disrupt the whole process and you don't get the effect of increased growth hormone. Growth hormone is really powerful but it doesn't work alone. In fact, a lot of the effects of growth hormone are mediated by its effects on the liver. So growth hormone is released, goes to the liver, and then the liver releases something called IGF-1, insulin growth factor 1. Insulin growth factor 1 was popular in the neuroscience community as an area of focus because of its ability to trigger improvements in memory and learning after exercise. And indeed exercise triggers both the release of growth hormone and IGF-1. IGF-1 seems responsible for a lot of the effects of improved memory. Some people report that that is due to increased number of neurons or neurogenesis, birth of new neurons. It's pretty clear that in humans, that's not what's happening. Yes in animals, not in humans. IGF-1 nonetheless has positive effects on memory and cognition. And a great way to trigger IGF-1 release and growth hormone release is through exercise. Now, the interesting thing, and the reason I'm bringing up IGF-1 here is that certain patterns of exercise, actually duration of exercise have different effects on IGF-1 and growth hormone, depending on whether or not the exercise is done by men or women. There's what we call sex-dependent effect. And the sex-dependent effect is as follows. In this particular study and several others, what they did is they had people exercise. They measured growth hormone and IGF-1 levels from the blood before, during and after exercise. And they could see when the greatest increases occurred. This was standard sorts of resistance exercise. So some squats. There was a sprint like activity. It doesn't really matter what the specific exercises were. None of them were to failure. These were in kind of the 10 repetition or less range, six sets. So kind of standard weight training stuff that anyone might do. But what was interesting is that women were able to access the biggest peak in growth hormone and IGF-1 early in the exercise. So in the first 30 minutes. So what this means is even if you just have 30 minutes, at least for women, there's going to be a big increase in growth hormone and IGF-1 in the first 30 minutes. For men, the biggest increase occurred later in the exercise, which was at 60 minutes or so total. And so the sex-dependent effects are interesting. They point to the fact that things like cortisol, testosterone, and estrogen, which of course vary in different levels in men and women are going to impact the release of things like IGF-1 and growth hormone. And yes, they did control for all sorts of things like diet and they controlled for weight and prior experience. It's actually a quite nice study. If you'd like to check it out, it's by a Pierce et al, "Growth Hormone and Insulin Growth Factor-I Molecular Weight Isoform Response to Resistance Exercise Are Sex-Dependent" in Frontiers in Endocrinology, fine journal in 2020. So it's quite recent. So what does this mean? This means if you're exercising and you want growth hormone release, warm up, do the type of exercise that we've been discussing. Women, in the first 30 minutes, is when you're going to get the maximum benefit in terms of growth hormone and IGF-1. Men, you have to keep going for the entire 60 minutes. So don't tap out early if you're interested in getting the growth hormone and IGF-1 release. And the same conditions apply about then cooling down and not making the exercise last so long that you don't get the increase in growth hormone the following night. My experience thus far in doing this podcast is that people fall into one of two categories. There are the just tell me what to take people, the people that are really eager to try supplements and maybe in prescription compounds. And then there are people who are a little bit more shy about supplementation. They are more focused on what they can do with diet and behaviors and things of that sort. I don't have a bias either way. I try and offer tools that are supported by the scientific literature. And I always point to safety margins. There are supplements that can increase growth hormone to a considerable degree and no, these aren't growth hormone itself. Although, that of course will increase growth hormone to a considerable degree. We will talk about prescription drugs at the end, not just growth hormone, but some other things that are quite prominently in use right now, in particular in the entertainment industry. There are pretty interesting compounds. But first let's talk about supplements. So this has been known about for some time but arginine, the amino acid arginine, as well as the amino acid ornithine can increase growth hormone levels substantially. Now, arginine has a number of effects. You can get it from food, you can get it from supplements. Some people take it in pill form or capsule form. Some people will actually take it by IV, intravenously. The levels and the amounts of arginine required to get big growth hormone release increases is pretty substantial. So some people will take arginine before bedtime, some people will take it before exercise. The prerequisite again is low blood glucose. Blood glucose is high, it's going to quash the effect. The amounts of arginine that people take are anywhere from three grams to 10 grams, or sometimes even more. Although, this is definitely a case of more is not better. There's a threshold at which growth hormone release is actually blunted by taking more than nine grams of arginine. Now, nine grams of arginine orally is a lot of pills. It's at minimum nine pills. And it can cause some GI disturbance, right? People can feel nauseous. Some people will throw it up. Some people get some constipation or diarrhea, et cetera, or just stomachaches. I'm certainly not suggesting people do this that they take arginine but that's the reason why most of the studies that looked at the role of arginine on growth hormone levels did it by IV, intravenous infusion. So what's interesting, however, is that whether or not it's by mouth or by vein, taking arginine can dramatically increase growth hormone release and the levels or the amount of increase was anywhere from 100 on the low-end but anywhere basically from 400 to 600% above baseline. So these are huge increases in growth hormone. Now, I've never tried arginine. Arginine is out there for a number of different purposes. One of them is to increase growth hormone. Some of the supplements out there to increase growth hormone include arginine and ornithine. Arginine does have the effect of dilating arterials. And it basically increases blood supply. The arginine pathway is involved in vasodilation. It's actually the pathway that's downstream of a lot of drugs that are used to treat things like erectile dysfunction. And anytime people have problems with peripheral blood flow of any kind, they focus on compounds that will either disrupt the enzymes or will adjust the levels of amino acids to get more vasodilation. So taking arginine for the purpose of increasing growth hormone will also have the effect of dilating blood vessels and for people with blood, excuse me, with heart conditions, that actually can be a serious issue. Now, here is something really important and interesting to note, which is that increasing arginine levels with the specific goal of increasing growth hormone release can actually short circuit the effects of exercise on growth hormone. Several studies that I looked at, looked at the interaction of taking arginine and the exercise or just the arginine or just the exercise alone. And so you don't, unfortunately, if growth hormone increase is your goal, you don't unfortunately get to increase growth hormone 800% by taking arginine and exercising. It always seems to be clamped at about 300 to 500% increases. Still large increases. So I make that point for several reasons. First of all, be aware that arginine has these other effects on vasodilation. Take those seriously if you have a heart condition or take them seriously in any case. Second of all, you can supplement with arginine, not exercise and get these big increases in growth hormone by taking them before sleep. But if you're taking the arginine before exercise, you're going to short circuit or clamp the effects of exercise on growth hormone, okay? So it's something that one could use but it doesn't have a synergistic effect with exercise. The two more or less cancel each other out, not to zero, but you end up with the same effect you would had you done one or the other. So hopefully that's clear. The other thing is if one's goal is really to increase arginine in the blood for whatever reason, arginine may not actually be the best way to do that. Because of the way it's metabolized in the gut, it doesn't have access or get access to the tissues that you're most interested in in terms of increasing growth hormone or vasodilation for that matter. And in that case, there's something else called L-citrulline which has powerful effects on vasodilation, powerful effects potentially on growth hormone levels via the arginine pathway. But basically L-citrulline, it acts as sort of a donor, or it's kind of a biological prerequisite for arginine and can lead to even bigger arginine increases than you would get if you took arginine itself. And so L-citrulline is out there. Keep in mind that anything that dilates the blood vessels will lower blood pressure. So L-citrulline, yes, will lead to increase blood flow for whatever purpose you want to use it for, whether or not that's pumps in the gym or whatever. It also can lead to big increases in arginine and growth hormone, but it will lower blood pressure. So be aware of that. And understand that the biology isn't so straightforward. L-citrulline may actually be the better way to get arginine increases than arginine itself. And ornithine can also increase growth hormone, although that's also through an indirect pathway. And nowadays, there isn't a lot of focus on ornithine as a way to increase growth hormone. That was kind of all the rage in the 90s, not so much anymore. Nowadays, the people are really in the know for this stuff tend to focus on L-citrulline. And if you're interested in L-citrulline or arginine, I highly recommend you go to our old friend, good friends, examine.com, because there you can put it into their list. You can just put search and it's totally free. And it will tell you that blood pressure will be slightly decreased. Power output in the gym will increase. There's very strong effects on blood glucose. Fatigue is reduced notably. Big increases in nitric oxide. That's also related to the increase in vasodilation. Plasma arginine, very high, excuse me, notable effects, very high support for studies, which allow people more training volume, aerobic exercise, arterial stiffness is brought down. There's a huge list of things. Increase in growth hormone. So two studies showing, this was done double-blind. Great, you always want to see double-blind, placebo controlled. This was only done in males, not in females. Unfortunately, just have data from males but increases in growth hormone, it's a small, but a real significant effect. And again, from quality studies. So there's a huge number of effects there. And some of the other kind of more interesting ones about L-citrulline that you might not have thought about are things like muscle oxygenation as we scroll down, decreases in c-reactive protein. So a lot of the same things that you might affect, expect, excuse me, from the same sorts of compounds we saw before. The takeaway here is if you want to increase growth hormone, think about the arginine pathway, but arginine itself might not be the best direct route to get there. L-citrulline might be a better option. But please do consider take very seriously the effects on blood pressure. So we've been talking about big effects from supplementation or exercise on growth hormone, this extremely powerful hormone. And one thing to note is that the profile of growth hormone as we age, changes, I mentioned that earlier, but it's important to understand how it changes. One thing that's particularly interesting to me as somebody who's in his 40s is that it's actually between ages 30 and 40 that the amount of growth hormone that you release each night is reduced by two to threefold. That's really incredible. You know, we hear so much about testosterone levels going down as we age or estrogen levels going down. But if you recall from the testosterone and estrogen episode, we talked about the fact that if you really look at the data, just for instance, on testosterone, there are men in their 90s and they are not rare, it turns out, that are making as much testosterone and DHT, dihydrotestosterone, as they were in their 20s, okay? So we hear so much nowadays about how testosterone levels are dropping, sperm levels are dropping, et cetera. And I don't dispute that. I talked about that in that episode. But it's clear that testosterone levels vary tremendously from person to person. And just getting older does not necessarily mean that testosterone levels are dropping. Growth hormone levels, it seems, are dropping when people are in their 30s and 40s and they're dropping substantially. And that seems to be the case across the board. You're just not going to find people in their 40s, 50s and 60s that are making as much growth hormone as they were in their teens and 20s. And as somebody who, I feel really good, but as somebody who definitely noticed that as I got into my 40s that even if I slept the same amount, I wasn't feeling quite as I would say able to recover from exercise or wound healing even with the same amount of sleep. And I was trying to optimize a great number of things. This business of growth hormone became a particular interest to me. And since the ways to manipulate growth hormone in men and women are so straightforward. And since everybody goes through this age-related decline very dramatically, it seems to me that the things that we're supposed to be doing anyway, like exercising, like trying not to eat too close to bedtime, trying to optimize sleep. All of these are wonderful tools that we should be pursuing and perhaps using. And they can actually offset the two to three fold decrease, right? If we're talking about a two to threefold decrease for people that are in their 30s and 40s. And then we're talking about increases from exercise or maybe from supplementation but certainly from exercise of 300 to 500%. Well, then, all of a sudden we're in a position to actually offset the age-related decline in growth hormone completely just through behaviors. And I think that's quite interesting and quite powerful. Now, I'd like to discuss a way that anyone can increase their levels of growth hormone dramatically. And when I say dramatically, I mean dramatically. I'll get to the numbers in a couple minutes. But we have to remember how growth hormone is released in the first place. Remember, it all starts in the brain, in the hypothalamus. The hypothalamus is a brain area that controls things like sexual behavior, temperature regulation, circadian behavior, meaning when you want to be awake and when you want to be asleep, aggression, all of that. There are other brain areas involved too but it has a rich collection of different neurons involved in all these very basic functions. Now, as we talked about the releasing hormones, the growth hormone-releasing hormone, it comes from neurons in the hypothalamus. Those then communicate with the pituitary and the pituitary releases growth hormone and then the growth hormone acts on all these different tissues, muscle, liver, cartilage, et cetera, body fat. Makes them use energy. That's why you lose body fat when growth hormone levels are high. It makes you grow muscle, strengthens bones, et cetera. Now, one of the things that has a profound effect on growth hormone levels, growth hormone release, is temperature. Now, the data on this are very strong and the data come from both animal studies and human studies. So there are a number of studies that have explored how making animals cold or hot can increase growth hormone. And if you're guessing which direction this is going to go, you can probably imagine that making animals or people warmer is the way to go if you want to increase growth hormone. Now, anytime you're going to increase temperature of yourself or anyone else or an animal, it is risky. I want to be really clear about this. Not everyone should engage in the behaviors I'm about to describe. And I should just say the reason it's risky is it doesn't take much of a temperature increase in the brain to cook the brain, to cook neurons. And after that point, neurons can't come back. And people can die from hyperthermia. We have a much greater range in terms of cold. You can also die of hypothermia. You can freeze to death. But you have a much greater range of getting cold than you do warming up the brain. However, there are really strong data pointing to the fact that sauna, AKA deliberate hyperthermia, not too high, however, that sauna can increase the release of growth hormone and other hormones. And what's so dramatic about this literature is the size of the effects that are reported. So first of all, let's talk about these temperature increases. And yes, I will refer to things that people can do even if you don't own a sauna because I realized not everybody has a sauna in their backyard or has access to a sauna. So first of all, recall our study about exercise where warming up a few degrees before the exercise led to bigger and quicker increases in growth hormone during the exercise about itself. So that already point in the direction that temperature was important. Now, the degrees, no pun intended, that we're talking about increasing body temperature is by entering saunas that are somewhere between 176 degrees Fahrenheit, so that's 80 degrees Celsius, and all the way up to like 210, 215 degrees Fahrenheit. I personally know people that go even higher than that but they've trained themselves to deal with very high heats. And again, high heat is dangerous. You must clear this with your doctor. Now, what happens in high heat? A couple things happen in high heat. First of all, you start getting bigger stroke volume of the heart. Kind of like an exercise. Once you get well-trained in endurance activity, your stroke volume and the amount of blood that your heart can pump each time gets larger. You dilate the blood vessels, right? There are a lot of things that happen also. You're sweating. Your body's trying to unload heat. Dilation of blood vessels, arginine, increases in heat. We're starting to see and hear a common theme. But it appears that getting into, I'm not saying getting the body up to 212 degrees Fahrenheit, I want to be very clear, I'm not talking about getting the body up to 100 degrees Celsius. That would be terrible. You would die. But entering environments where it's very hot for short periods of time, anywhere from 20 minutes to 30 minutes, where the temperature is 80 degrees Celsius to 100 degrees Celsius or 175 degrees Fahrenheit, more or less, to about 210 degrees Fahrenheit, more or less, has been shown to increase growth hormone release 16 fold. That's right, 16 fold. That's 1,600%. Now, there are also effects on other hormones, prolactin, cortisol, et cetera. So the pattern that was described in this study and there've been many studies now. Endocrine effects of repeated sauna were done in 17 humans. This was from doing this repeatedly. So it wasn't the first time they did this. They had to do this three days in a row. And the pattern was to get into the sauna for 20 minutes, followed by a 30-minute cooling period. Remember, you don't want to spend long periods of time at high heat. You can cook your brain and other tissues. Be very careful as you approach this if you decide to. But 30 minutes, excuse me, 20 minutes sauna, followed by 30 minutes of cooling, followed by 20 minutes sauna again, led to a five fold increase in growth hormone. And then by doing that day after day after day, on the third day, you would see these huge increases of like 16 fold, up to 16 fold. And there are now many studies like this. This was described a few years ago, but since then, there've been a number of other studies that have pointed in the direction of deliberate hyperthermia, but not too hot that you kill yourself in order to increase growth hormone. And I know I keep highlighting the dangers there, but again, anytime you're going to mess with heat, you have to be cautious, you have to be careful. So standard sauna can be useful. If you don't have access to a sauna, one way that people do this, we have to look to our friends, the wrestlers, right? They wear plastics, which are basically bodysuits that are fairly inexpensive that you can buy on any online purchase platform, I should say. Some people in the old days before they had these plastic things so readily available. I actually knew people that wrapped themselves in garbage bags and then throw on sweats and a hoodie and then go out for a jog. Again, you have to be really careful, especially on a hot day. Overheating can equate to death. But that's another way to heat up. You don't actually need a sauna. I've known people who will do this in hotel rooms while they're traveling. They'll turn on the heat, you know, make a hot bath. They won't actually get in the bath but they'll fill the room with steam and heat and they'll put on a hoodie and some sweatshirt, sweat pants, and they'll sit there with wool socks on and they'll get warm for 20 minutes, then they'll take a cool shower, and then they'll do it again. I guess when the hotel is paying the water bill, you don't worry about it too much. Some people of course own saunas. There are a lot of ways to do that. I have friends who were in the military who made saunas out of cars while they were overseas. All sorts of things. You do have to be careful. I know I've said it many, many times. I just don't want anyone to hurt themselves. But these increases in growth hormone are tremendous. And what they probably stem from are increased activity of neurons within the hypothalamus that stimulate growth hormone release from the pituitary. And that's probably because the growth hormone-releasing hormone neurons in the hypothalamus sit very closely and may even be intermixed with some of the neurons in the hypothalamus that regulate heat and body temperature. Remember, metabolism is impart a heat. It's like a furnace of how much energy you're consuming and using for building or for energy usage purposes. So sauna can be very, very interesting. And again, it's 20 minutes, 30-minute cooling, 20 minutes again, proceed with extreme caution, but nonetheless, these are pretty extreme effects in terms of their abilities to increase growth hormone levels. Along the lines of temperature and hormones, I just want to mention a very recent study, it just came out. March, April, 2021, "Endocrine Effects of Repeated Hot Thermal Stress and Cold Water Immersion in Young Adult Men." Unfortunately, it was just in men, they didn't look at women, but nonetheless I think the data are relevant to everybody as a general theme. This is Podstawski et al. I will put a link to the study in the caption and they looked at testosterone, prolactin, cortisol, et cetera. And what they found was that the sauna does indeed lead to a significant decrease in cortisol, a stress hormone, a hormone that you want to be released early in the day when you wake up. But sauna definitely led to significant decrease in cortisol but did not change testosterone, DHEA or prolactin levels. So that's interesting. And it turns out that the cold did affect some of these hormones but the results there were a little bit more mixed. So the takeaway here is that heat seems to have positive effects on growth hormone, big effects. It seems to have positive effects on reducing cortisol levels. And it does not seem to have effects on things like testosterone, DHEA, or prolactin directly. You can imagine that a shift in any hormone is going to alter the levels of other hormones down the lines or have indirect effects but in terms of direct effects just during or immediately after the sauna bath, there were no effects. So we've talked about diet, supplementation, behavioral tools. And of course, we talked about the underlying biology and logic. And hopefully you heard the safety precautions for all of those. Now, I'd like to just briefly talk about the prescription side of all this. There are, as we know, many people taking growth hormone because it's been prescribed to them by a doctor. And presumably there are people taking growth hormone even though it has not been prescribed by a doctor, which is none of my business. But the point here is that most all of the hormones that we make have been synthesized. So there are versions of them in little bottles or little ampules that people can inject. Here are a couple of important things to consider if you're going to go that route. First of all, talk to a physician, all right? They actually are only legally available through a physician. Second of all, anytime you're injecting something, you're going to shut down your own production. That's the way that the hormone system works. If you take thyroid hormone, you won't make thyroid hormone, at least in the long run. If you take testosterone, you will shut down your own production of testosterone. If you take estrogen, the system's a little more resilient but eventually you will shut down your production of estrogen. And the same is true for growth hormone. So a decision to go that route of taking something is often not always a decision to do it forever. However, if you're willing to sustain a period of being without a given hormone, some people can do things and then stop taking them, and then wait out the period in which they're not making testosterone, estrogen or growth hormone, and then it will come back, sometimes and sometimes it won't. There's a kind of new area that's developing now that I think deserves our attention, not because I'm encouraging it, but because it is happening. And in keeping with the science and in keeping with trying to keep things modern, it's worth us discussing. And those are peptides. So these days you hear a lot about peptides. I'd like to clarify a little bit about what peptides are. Peptides is a really huge category of biological compounds. Peptides are just strings of amino acids, right? So we've talked about L-tyrosine, arginine, ornithine. Those are amino acids. Those are individual amino acids. And those are put together into little small peptides or they're what are called polypeptides, which are just longer peptides. It turns out that for any substance like growth hormone or growth hormone-releasing hormone, it's made up of different amino acids in different sequences, just like your genes are made up of As and Gs and Cs and Ts, nucleotides in different sequences. It's like a recipe. Peptides tend to be short sequences of amino acids that resemble a hormone enough or resemble some other peptide enough that it can lead to the similar same effects when you inject them. So for example, we make growth hormone-releasing hormone from our brain which stimulates growth hormone from the pituitary. You're probably getting tired of me saying that by now. But people now will take things like sermorelin, S-E-R-M-O-R-E-L-I-N, sermorelin, which is not the entire peptide sequence of growth hormone-releasing hormone but it's a subset of those. And when people inject it before they go to sleep at night is typically how it's done on an empty stomach. Then that stimulates the release of growth hormone from the pituitary. So this is not taking growth hormone, this is taking the stimulating hormone or what's often called a secretagogue or a mimic, all right? It causes a secretion of the hormone that one wants. People will do this for thyroid hormone, too. Some people are doing this by prescription with a real medical need. Other people are doing it for just longevity reasons, which kind of falls into that gray zone of they wouldn't die without it, but they want to enhance their life and so they're doing that because they believe it's the right thing for them, prescription. Sermorelin is prescription. Do they work? Yes. Do they shut down your natural production of growth hormone-releasing hormone? Well, there, the answer is yes but some of these peptides actually have the effect of changing gene expression. Remember, way back to the beginning when I was talking about hormones, they can actually change gene expression and they can actually set pathways in motion for continued production of a hormone even if you stop taking the compound. Now, that can be good or that can be bad because as you recall, growth hormone, big increases in growth hormone that are short-lived like sauna, or, you know, I should say exercise or arginine or sauna, it seems like has these huge effects. Or early nights, you know, first phase of sleep early in the night, these sorts of things. Those are transient. But when one is injecting over and over at constant level, you can put into action gene expression programs that can be long lived. And let's say, you have a particular tumor in the body. Tumors will grow when they see growth hormone even if that tumor is unhealthy for you, right? You've got growth of tissues all over the body. So again, I'm not saying whether or not people should do these things or not doing them. One thing I do know is that they are in very prominent use in the movie industry. People who want to peel off body fat quickly, they do increase recovery time. They increase healing rates. People are also injecting things like gastric peptides. They're actually stomach peptides that we talked about in the previous episode, things related to the ghrelin pathway and other things from the liver that can improve the rate of tissue and wound healing. You can bet that in the upcoming Olympics, lot of people are using peptides and compounds and I'm not pointing fingers at anyone in particular. It's just this is separate from hormone augmentation of like injecting GH or injecting testosterone. People are now working further up the pathways. Other names of some of the peptides are things like ipamorelin, tesamorelin. Some of these have clinical uses. Others have just been made as compounds for people in the kind of longevity field or the self-augmentation field, if you will. So again, not promoting their use but they're definitely out there. And so now if you hear about them or if someone's talking to you about them, now hopefully you have a better understanding about their underlying biology. And you can think rationally about whether or not they are the right decision for you. Okay, once again, covered an enormous amount of material. Hopefully, now you understand thyroid hormone and what it does and a little bit about its mechanism or maybe a lot and growth hormone and what it does and how both of them take care of our metabolism. They dictate how many nutrients we can eat and make use of. They can pull from body fat stores, repair muscle, repair cartilage. They really are incredible compounds. And they're actionable. They're things that we can do, like getting that early phase of sleep, perhaps supplementing with arginine, maybe not, hopefully getting adequate exercise, warming up properly, not making the exercise too long or too intense will help, maybe sauna or things like it. You know, deliberate, safe hyperthermia, with the emphasis on safe, might be things that are of use. Regardless, even if you're not interested in the thyroid or the growth hormone pathways, this brings to a close our month on hormones. And so now hopefully you understand not just thyroid and growth hormone but the logic that underlies thyroid hormone, growth hormone, estrogen, testosterone, why we eat, why we stop eating, cholecystokinin, ghrelin. If these names don't mean anything to you, then perhaps go back and listen to those episodes. But regardless, I hope that you come away from this with a deeper understanding about these hormones which are so powerful in controlling the way our brain functions and the interplay between the brain and hormones because it is really a bidirectional conversation. The brain is telling body what hormones to make. The hormones are influencing all the tissues of the body but also telling the brain whether or not to eat more or grow more or think more, et cetera. So I really appreciate your time and attention. If you like this podcast and you're finding it useful, please recommend it to other people. If you are on YouTube, please subscribe. Please leave us a comment or feedback in the comment section. We do read all of the comments and we use those comments as ways to inform future content of the podcast. If you listen to it in audio form, please subscribe on Apple and/or Spotify. That really helps us. On Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us a five star review and to leave us feedback, written feedback as well. I should also mention on YouTube, hit the subscribe button but also hit the notifications button. We release episodes every Monday, but sometimes we also really short clips in between. That way, you're sure to never miss an episode. If you want to support us further, please check out the sponsors we talk about at the beginning of the podcast episode, that really helps us. We also have a Patreon account. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. There, you can support the podcast at any level that you like. And I mentioned supplements this episode. I often mention supplements. They are certainly not necessary, but for those of you interested in supplements, we've partnered with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E because Thorne has the highest levels of stringency in terms of the quality of the ingredients and the amount of the ingredients in each capsule, tablet, powder, et cetera. If you want to see the supplements that I take, as well as get a discount on any of those or any of the supplements that Thorne makes, it's Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E, dot com slash the letter U, slash Huberman. And you can get 20% off any of the supplements they make. I should mention Thorne works with the Mayo Clinic. They partnered with them. They worked with all the major sports teams. So really the highest levels of stringency. We're quite happy to be working with them. And last but not least, I thank you for your time and attention and above all, for your interest in science. [guitar music]

========================================

--- Video 331 ---
Video ID: 17O5mgXZ9ZU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=17O5mgXZ9ZU
Title: How Our Hormones Control Our Hunger, Eating & Satiety
Published: 2021-04-19 12:00:01 UTC
Description:
This episode I discuss how hormones from our gut, liver, pancreas and brain control our appetite-- and the specific tools we can use to adjust those hormones in order to achieve specific goals. I explain the brain areas that control our desire to eat, and our desire to stop eating. I discuss a hormone we all can make that is regulated by UV-rays from sunlight that reduces our appetite. I also explain that when we eat controls our appetite and not the other way around (and how to leverage that fact). I describe how we are basically always eating until we reach a threshold level of fatty acids and amino acids in our gut and the factors that can alter that signaling and make us eat far more than we need. I also explain how insulin, glucose and glucagon work, why cholesterol is so key for ovary, adrenal, liver and testes function and how the ketogenic diet impacts glucose and thyroid levels. As always, I describe many tools: specific supplements, prescription compounds, specific types (and timing) of exercise to regulate hormones, specific timing and types of eating, ways to reduce sugar cravings by triggering the release of the hormone CCK, and more. 

Note: A future episode will cover Thyroid hormone. Also, I misspoke when explaining POMC neurons. I said “P-M-O-C” but should have said “POMC”. Apologies. The name I gave for what POMC is, however, was correct: "proopiomelanocortin".

#HubermanLab #Hunger #Hormones

Thank you to our sponsors
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman
AG1 (Athletic Greens): httpS://athleticgreens.com/huberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Join the Neural Network - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Website: https://hubermanlab.com
Join the Neural Network: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Links:
Dr. Lustig’s Lecture - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nxyxcTZccsE 
Paper In Cell Metabolism On Processed Food Effects - https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2019.05.008  

Timestamps:
00:00:00 Introduction 
00:06:59 Hunger: Neural & Hormonal Control  
00:08:32 Chewing & Hunger  
00:11:05 Siamese Rats Reveal the Importance of Hormones In Hunger 
00:13:08 Neurons That Powerfully Control Hunger by Releasing Specific Hormones 
00:16:28 Anorexia & Extreme Overeating
00:16:57 Why Sunlight Suppresses Hunger: a-Melanocyte Stimulating Hormone (a -MSH) 
00:20:03 Blue-blockers, Injecting a-MSH: Instant Tan & Priapism 
00:22:30 Ghrelin: A Hormone That Determines When You Get Hungry, & That You Can Control 
00:24:40 Meal Timing Determines Hunger, Not the Other Way Around 
00:27:20 Satchin Panda, Circadian Eating & Intermittent(ish) Fasting 
00:29:35 How To Rationally Adjust Meal Schedules: The 45min Per Day Rule 
00:33:02 CCK (Cholecystokinin): A Hormone In Your Gut That Says “No Mas!” 
00:34:55 Eating For Amino Acids, Fatty Acids & Sugar  
00:39:05 L-Glutamine: Stimulates the Immune System & Reduces Sugar Cravings 
00:43:42 Things To Avoid: Emulsifiers; Alter Gut Mucosa & Nutrient Sensing 
00:49:32 “A Calorie Is NOT A Calorie” After All 
00:52:36 Insulin & Glucose: Hyperglycemia, Euglycemia, & Hypogylcemia  
00:56:12 The Order Your Eat Foods Matters: Managing Your Blood Glucose & Glucagon 
01:02:40 Movement, Exercise & GLUT-4 
01:04:50 Why Sugar Stimulates Your Appetite  
01:05:40 Keeping Blood Sugar Stable With Specific Exercises, The Power Of Insulin Sensitivity 
01:07:55 High-Intensity Exercise, Glycogen & Metabolism 
01:10:28 Cholesterol, HDL, LDL & Glucose Management: Ovaries, Testes, Liver, Adrenals 
01:15:00 Prescription Compounds That Reduce Blood Glucose: Metformin  
01:16:45 Berberine: A Potent Glucose Buffer That Also Adjusts Cholesterol Levels, Canker Sores 
01:22:05 Chromium, L-Carnitine, Ginseng, Caffeine, Magnesium, Stevia, Vitamin B3, & Zinc 
01:24:34 Acids: Vinegar, Lemons & Limes & False Alkalinity  
01:26:40 Ketogenic Diets (In Brief): Effects On Blood Glucose, Thyroid Hormones 
01:28:10 Diabetes, Filtering Blood, Sweet Urine 
01:31:08 The Power of GLP-1 & Yerba Mate For Controlling Appetite, Electrolytes 
01:35:19 Summary & Notes About Thyroid, Estrogen, Testosterone 
01:37:20 Zero Cost & Sponsor-Based Ways To Support The Huberman Lab Podcast 

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English (United States)
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [gentle music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a fan of getting blood work done. And the simple reason for that, is that most of the things that you want to know about your health, such as hormones, metabolic factors, blood sugar levels, et cetera, can only be analyzed from blood. And nowadays there are also excellent DNA tests that can also give you valuable information about what's going on at the cellar, molecular, even the neural circuit level within your brain and body. InsideTracker makes getting blood and DNA tests easy. You can go to a testing site where they draw your blood, they take your DNA sample, or they can come to your home if you prefer that. As well, they have a really amazing dashboard. The dashboard lets you understand what your levels of various hormones and metabolic factors et cetera mean, and what you should do about them. And I think that's one of the main things that really separates InsideTracker apart from other blood and DNA tests. Most tests you get the results back, but there are no directives about what to do specifically in order to bring the numbers into the ranges that you would like for your goals. InsideTracker makes all of that extremely simple and extremely clear. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman, and if you do that, you'll get 25% off any of InsideTrackers plans. Use the code Huberman at checkout. That's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTrackers plans. Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral probiotic drink. I started taking Athletic Greens back in 2012 and I've taken it ever since. So I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens and the reason I still take it now, is that Athletic Greens really lets me cover all my nutritional basis in terms of vitamins, minerals and probiotics. There's so much data now pointing to the fact that the gut microbiome and the gut brain axis is important for metabolism and for endocrine health. The vitamins, minerals and probiotics in Athletic Greens make me feel confident that I'm covering all my bases. I do take other supplements, but with Athletic Greens I know that I've got all the foundational stuff handled. It also tastes really good. Tastes fine on its own, you can mix it with water, which is what I do. I add a little bit of lemon juice or lime juice, because I like a little tartness flavor in there as well, but most people just mix it with water, it mixes up super easily. I drink it once or twice a day. Usually once mid morning, and once again in the afternoon. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman. And if you do that, you can claim their special offer which is a year supply of vitamin D3K2. There is now a ton of evidence that vitamin D3 is involved in countless metabolic processes, hormonal processes that are important for overall health and wellbeing. Vitamin D3, you can get from the sun of course, but most people are deficient in vitamin D3. So if you go to athleticgreens.com/huberman you'll get the Athletic Greens, you'll get the year's supply of vitamin D3 and K2 and you'll get five free travel packs. So once again it's athleticgreens.com/huberman, to get Athletic Greens, the vitamin D3K2, and that's a year supply plus the five free travel packs. Today's episode is also brought to us by Munk Pack. Munk Pack is a company that makes keto-friendly snacks that taste incredible but have just one gram of sugar or less. And indeed they taste incredible. In fact, my production team here at the Huberman Lab Podcast teases me because I actually have to keep the boxes of Munk Pack bars in my basement 'cause otherwise I'll tear through all of them. I remember the first time I tasted it, I was like, all right, here we go, a keto bar. I'm not a big fan of bars in general, most of them don't taste good to me. And I tasted the Munk Pack bars, and they are absolutely awesome. They come in a lot of different flavors. I'm partial to the caramel sea salt one, but they also have sea salt dark chocolate, peanut butter dark chocolate. They have a bunch of flavors. They're all incredible, I've tried them all. Which is why I keep them in my basement. As I mentioned previously on this podcast, I'm neither keto nor carbo. I don't really follow a particular diet in that sense. I eat in a way that maximizes my alertness and my levels of focus during the day when I want to work, and that maximize my transition to sleep at night. So, I basically eat low carb keto-ish during the day. And I know the ketonistas will say that I'm not in ketosis and I can manage to get into ketosis. But the main idea, is I keep my carbohydrates low during the day. And then at night I do eat carbohydrates. So for me, the Munk Pack bars are a really good snack usually in the afternoon, with a cup of coffee, especially if I'm going to train soon after that, or if I just want to snack and I'm going to continue working. As I mentioned before, they are absolutely delicious. They also don't have any of the stuff that's bad for you. No soy, trans fat, sugar, alcohols, artificial colors, all that stuff that we know we should avoid. If you want to try Munk Pack bars, you can go to Munk Pack, that's M-U-N-K, MunkPack.com, and enter the code Huberman at checkout and you'll get 20% off your first purchase of any Munk Pack product. That's Munk Pack, M-U-N-K-P-A-C-K.com, and enter the code Huberman at checkout to get 20% off your purchase. This month, we're talking all about hormones. Hormones are incredible and they control so many processes in the brain and body. Last episode, we talked about the role of estrogen and testosterone. Today we're going to talk about how hormones impact feeding and hunger, as well as satiety, the feeling that you don't want to eat or that you've eaten enough. Now, it's important to understand that hormones don't work alone in this context. Today I'm going to describe some hormones that have powerful effects on whether or not you want to eat more or less or stop eating altogether. But they don't do that on their own, they do that in cooperation with the nervous system. So today, I would say as much or perhaps even more than any other episodes, we're going to hear a lot of biology but there are multiple what I'm going to call entry points for tools that you can apply in order to regulate your levels of hunger, your meal timing, your levels of satiety of not wanting to eat more. And many of this is actionable with behaviors, but of course, we're also going to talk about supplements and we're actually going to talk about a little bit of brain machine interface devices that can actually be involved in manipulating these incredible things that we think of as hunger and appetite and satiety. So, the first thing that you need to know about the nervous system side, the neural control, over-feeding and hunger, is that there's an area of your brain called the hypothalamus. It's in the forebrain, which tells you it's in the front of your brain, and it's at the base of the forebrain. Now, the hypothalamus contains lots of different kinds of neurons doing lots of different kinds of things. There are neurons in your hypothalamus controlling sexual behavior, controlling body temperature, controlling circadian rhythms, the desire to sleep or be awake. Even neurons controlling rage. There are actually neurons that if we were to stimulate them would send you or anyone into a rage. They're just powerful control centers for the brain and body. There's a particular area of the hypothalamus called the ventromedial hypothalamus. And it's one that researchers have been interested for a long time now, in terms of its relationship to hunger and feeding. And the reason is, it creates these paradoxical effects. What do I mean by that? What they found was that sometimes lesioning, or disrupting the neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus would make animals or people hyperphasia, they would want to eat crazy. And other lesions in other individuals or animals would make them anorexic, it would make them not want to eat at all. It would make food aversive. So that means that the ventromedial hypothalamus is definitely an interesting control station for hunger and feeding and satiety, but it doesn't really tell you what's going on at a deeper level. In fact, it's a little bit confusing or paradoxical. It turns out that there are multiple populations of neurons in there, we're going to talk about those. Some are promoting feeding, and some are promoting not feeding or not eating. Now, the other neural component of all this that you need to know about, actually has to do with your mouth. So there's an area of your cortex, so that's a little bit further up in your brain, called the insular cortex. And it processes a lot of different kinds of information. Mostly information about what's going on inside you, so called the interoception. The insular cortex has neurons that get input from your mouth, from the touch receptors in your mouth. And insular cortex has powerful control over whether or not you're enjoying what you're eating, whether or not you want to avoid what you're eating, whether or not you had enough, or whether or not you want to continue eating more. And that has to do, believe it or not, with the touch or sensation of eating. I'm very familiar with this. I'm one of these people, I love eating so much, that I just like the mere act of chewing. You know, I like celery sticks enough. I'm not crazy about them, but you know they taste fine to me and I like chewing on celery sticks, but I actually just like chewing on them. I could eat all day long except that it's not healthy to do that. But the mere act of chewing for me is very pleasurable. People who chew gum feel this way as well. And just as a point about gum or chewing, if you choose something like celery or cucumber slices or chew gum, provided it doesn't have any sugar or caloric content, it's not going to drive increased hunger. That generally isn't the case. But if you eat something with sugar, as we'll find out, it has a very specific action in the insular cortex and in other areas of your nervous system that promotes the desire to eat more. But the key point right now is to know you've got these two brain areas, the ventromedial hypothalamus, that's involved in hunger and lack of hunger, sort of an accelerator and a brake on feeding. And you have this insular cortex that gets input from your mouth, and cares about chewing and the consistency of foods and all sorts of interesting things that are just very tactile. And I think most people think about the touch receptors on, excuse me, the taste receptors on the tongue. But we often don't think about the touch or tactile essence of food. And the thing that comes to mind just now is I've gone to sushi several times, and some people really like the urchin. I don't like the urchin. There's something about it that kind of creeps me out about the consistency, other people love it. So it's highly individual and it's probably learned, and there's some probably cultural background to this if you were raised eating urchin. Some people love that consistency or that touch. So touch has a lot to do with whether or not you want to eat or not. Now, let's get back to the ventromedial hypothalamus. Sometimes it makes animals or people want to eat more, sometimes less, so what's going on there? There's a classic experiment that was done in which researchers took two rats, and so-called parabiosed them to each other. What that meant is that they did a little surgery and they linked their blood supply so that they were forever physically linked to one another and could exchange factors in the blood, but their brains were separate, their mouths were separate, and they essentially did everything separately except that they were linked to one another. So they had to walk together and go to the same places in order to do it. This parabiosis experiment revealed something really important. When they lesioned the ventromedial hypothalamus in one of the rats that was connected to the other rat, that rat got very, very fat, just really obese, huge rat, super rat, jumbo rat. The other one however, got very thin, it actually lost weight, despite consuming the same amount of food that it had prior to the other one getting the lesion. So what does this tell us? This tells us that there's something in the blood that's being exchanged between the two animals, because it was their blood supply that was linked. And that tells us that there's hormone or endocrine signals that are involved in the desire to eat, and hunger and appetite. And so next, we're going to talk about what those endocrine signals are, and then I'm going to immediately point to some entry points that you can use. And you can use these even if you're not parabiosed to anything. And that can allow you to time your meal frequency, and predict when you're going to be hungry or not. As well as a drive up appetite. Believe it or not, there are people out there who are trying to eat more. Although I think far many more people are trying to eat less because nowadays, the data just point to the fact that there is essentially an epidemic of diabetes, type II diabetes and obesity. And most everyone agrees now, that maintaining a healthy body weight and body weight composition, is one of the best paths to longevity and to just feeling very good and actually being able to think. Cognitive functioning is actually linked to levels of adipose tissue and so forth. So, let's talk about the endocrine factors that regulate feeding, hunger and satiety. One of the really exciting things to emerge in the science of feeding and appetite in the last 20 years, is the discovery of another brain area. And not just the ventromedial hypothalamus, but it's an area of the brain called the arcuate nucleus. And the arcuate nucleus has some really fascinating sets of neurons that release even more incredible molecules and chemicals into the blood. And these chemicals act as accelerators on feeding and appetite, or breaks. And the really cool thing is that you can actually control these molecules through simple behaviors. And once you understand what these molecules are, you'll start to understand why that's the case. And the control points that you have right now in order to control your appetite in either direction, increase or decrease. So, first of all, there are set of neurons in this arcuate nucleus called the PMOC neurons, okay? I don't want to get into what the acronym stands for, but I'll do it anyway. It's the Proopiomelanocortin system, okay? So these are PMOC neurons, Proopiomelanocortin. And if you heard melano, that should tell you it has something to do with pigmentation in skin cells or in hair cells, pigmentation of some sort, because of melanin. Last episode, I talked a little bit about the relationship between light dopamine and melanin. So you should already be thinking, wait, melano means it probably has something to do with that system, and indeed it does. Now, the POMC neurons, make something called Alpha MSH. Melanocyte-stimulating hormone, Alpha-Melanocyte-stimulating hormone. If you don't want to remember any of the other acronyms and terms I've talked about, this episode so far, do try and remember M-S-H, okay? Mouse, Sam, Hamster, M-S-H, okay? MSH reduces appetite and it's a powerful molecule, all right? So just put that on the shelf, MSH reduces appetite. Now, there's another population of neurons in the arcuate nucleus, called the AgRP neurons. And there I'm truly not going to read you what that stands for 'cause it's related to the mouse strain it was first identified in, but humans have these cells as well, but AgRP neurons. The AgRP neurons stimulate eating. And anytime you are approaching food, or you feel some excitement about food or anxiety, because some people actually experience a kind of heightened anxiety. Some people actually get a little bit of a resting tremor before they eat, even if they don't have any sort of eating disorder. There's kind of a ramping up of autonomic activity. That's largely due to the activity of these AgRP neurons. So, the activity in these AgRP neurons goes way up when animals or people are starved. And I don't mean starved for long periods of time, but I mean when they haven't eaten for a while. And the activity of MSH, the release of MSH goes up when we've eaten. However, there are other things that will stimulate the release of things like MSH. So, just briefly the experimental evidence, if you kill AgRP neurons, animals and people stop eating. There are people of lesions. They just stop eating, they become anorexic. I know you're familiar with anorexia as a clinical term, but that's actually a term that's used in the scientific literature about a pattern of behavior, okay? As well as a clinical term of course. If you were to stimulate the AgRP neurons, animals or people eat like crazy. They will eat to the point where they burst. Which just sounds horrible, but it just tells you this is the accelerator on eating. And yes, it has relationship to the ventromedial hypothalamus I talked about earlier, but I don't want to go back there just yet, we will circle back. So Melanocyte-stimulating hormone, such an interesting hormone. This thing can shut down the desire to eat. The Melanocyte-stimulating hormone, is released from the medial pituitary. We talked about the pituitary last time. This is a gland that is very closely positioned to the hypothalamus. Actually some of the hypothalamus neurons actually project their neural connections directly into the pituitary, to release things like gonadotropins and luteinizing hormones, stuff we talked about last time in reference to testosterone and estrogen. But MSH is released from the medial portion of the pituitary and it stimulates the desire to not eat, to cease eating. What's really interesting, is that Melanocyte-stimulating hormone is activated by ultraviolet light. And it's not activated by ultraviolet light to the skin or directly to pituitary, it's activated by ultraviolet light to the eyes. Now, if you've been watching this podcast or listening to this podcast for any period of time, or you've heard me on other podcasts or you follow my Instagram, I am a big fan of this whole thing of getting morning light in order to synchronize circadian rhythms, et cetera, avoiding light in the middle of the night. This is yet another reason why getting ample light, ideally sunlight, but it could be other sources of UV light to the eyes, stimulates MSH, this has been shown over and over again. And keeps the desire to eat or appetite in check, in healthy ranges. This is also why in the spring and summer months, animals and people eat less. Now, for hibernating animals it's different, because they bear hibernate, actually. Ashley bears don't truly hibernate technically, by a scientific criteria they don't hibernate, but they go into a kind of torpor. The hibernating animals they don't eat much because they're in boroughs or dens, or they're just wrapped up in a little ball or whatever it is that hibernating animals do. So they're of course going to eat far less in the winter. But that's a unique scenario, we are not hibernating animals. But humans generally have greater appetite in the cold winter months. And it's not just because of the holidays and the abundance of food that we're presenting ourselves with, but when we get a lot of sun our appetite is reduced or at least it's easier to control. And that is due in part, because if you're getting ample sunlight to the eyes, it's converted into a signal for the MSH neurons, the neurons that release MSH, excuse me these PMOC neurons release MSH. And then MSH can bind its receptors, and can keep the break on appetite in check. So the takeaway tool from this, is make sure you're getting enough light not just in the morning, but throughout the day. And yes, it has to be light to your eyes. And blasting your eyes with sunlight or artificial light to the point where it's damaging or painful, won't accelerate or improve this process. It's about getting photons, ultraviolet light to the eyes consistently throughout the day. That's best accomplished by not wearing sunglasses provided you can do that safely. And if you don't have access to enough sunlight, then you can do this with artificial light. This also points again to our old friends, the blue blockers. Many people know I'm not a huge fan of blue blockers especially not during the daytime, because they block a lot of the UV and shorter wavelength light that you want and need to create alertness, but also to create release of MSH from the medial pituitary. Now there are people out there, subcultures, that actually inject MSH. That are taking MSH or things similar to it. I am not suggesting people do that. But there are three main consequences of doing that. First of all, it reduces appetite, no surprise there. And they're actually using it as a dieting drug. This is kind of in the underground. I don't know what the legal status is. And again, I'm not promoting that people do it. Two, it makes them very, very tan, which makes sense, right? Melanocyte-stimulating hormone. And the third is, it purportedly, never tried it, purportedly sends libido through the roof, to the point where it's actually distracting for other activities. It actually can create priapism, which is a kind of chronic erection in males to the point where it actually can be physically damaging to the genitalia. So this is a drug, I don't know whether or not it's call it a drug. It's a substance that one can regulate with healthy levels, with sunlight and perhaps artificial UV light. I have not heard much about treatments for obesity involving getting ample sunlight or getting ample UV light, but to me, the logic is just very clear. And so if you're pursuing those avenues, you certainly should talk to your physician but you might want to think about how some of those logic hangs together. Absolutely fascinating hormone, I think most people aren't aware of it. And the subcultures that are aware of it are using it for two very particular end points, and they're using it at super physiological levels. That's enough about that 'cause I really don't know. I've talked to a few people in research. Believe it or not for this podcast, I reached out to a few people and asked whether or not the these are side effects in air quotes. I've heard about are true, and indeed they're true. But again, that's super physiological, controlling MSH, it's actually Alpha MSH levels through viewing ultraviolet light seems like an interesting and mechanistically logical thing to do, if your goal is to keep appetite in check. So MSH inhibits hunger. Next, let's talk about a hormone peptide that activates hunger. And this is a really interesting one because it relates to when you get hungry, in addition to the fact that you get hungry at all. And it's called ghrelin, it's spelled G-H-R-E-L-I-N. Ghrelin is released actually from the GI tract. And its main role is to increase your desire to eat. And it does that through a variety of mechanisms. Part of that is to stimulate some of the brain areas, the actual neurons, that make you want to eat. In addition, it creates food anticipatory signals within your nervous systems. So you start thinking about the things that you happen to like to eat at that particular time of day. And this is fascinating. Ghrelin is sort of like a clock, a hormonal clock that makes you want to eat at particular times. Now, the signal for ghrelin is reduced glucose levels in the blood. We're going to talk a lot today about glucose and insulin, ways to manage glucose and insulin. But for now the simple version of this, is you normally want your glucose to be in a kind of modest range, and I'll explain what range is in a little bit. But if it drops too low, ghrelin is secreted from your gut. It activates neurons in your brain at various locations including the PMOC neurons, and the other neurons of the wingin' it. It also activates the VMH in particular ways. And it might even activate some of these neurons that are in the periphery in your mouth that actually make you salivate and want to eat, right? Now, we all know about the famous Pavlovian, experiments of Pavlov's dogs. You know, they start salivating to the bell. After the bell was presented with food, you remove the food, and then just the bell can stimulate the salivation. We become Pavlovian at times. But rarely is it ever discussed what the neural pathways for that are. And it turns out that these hormones that are secreted from the gut can stimulate the neurons to create a sensation and a desire for certain foods at certain times of day. You've done this experiment. If you are somebody who eats breakfast at more or less the same time each day, let's say 8:00 AM plus or minus 20 minutes. And then you eat lunch 12:30 plus or minus 20 minutes. Or let's say you're somebody like me who typically skips breakfast, and just eats lunch usually around 11:30 or 12 or something like that. Your ghrelin secretion will start to match when you typically eat. And it does that. And it's able to override the low levels of glucose in your bloodstream, because the ghrelin system also gets input from a clock in your liver that is linked to the clock in your hypothalamus, in your brain. And what this means is, if you eat at regular meal times, you'll start to get hungry a few minutes before those meals times. If you've ever wondered why your stomach kind of starts to growl because it's a particular time of day, and you're like, Oh I must want to eat, well, that's ghrelin. And for those of you that don't know why your stomach growls, I'll also tell you that today. It's actually really interesting. It not at all what you expect, and it's not just the gurgling of liquids in your stomach. That's not what it is. It's actually a muscular phenomenon. So, ghrelin is secreted as a food anticipatory signal, to get you motivated to go eat at regular times. So, nowadays there's a lot of interest in intermittent fasting. There's also a lot of interest in just what meal plans and schedules and what to eat in general, in order to maximize one's health and wellbeing. And people have all sorts of cosmetic reasons and brain reasons and metabolic reasons for wanting to control this kind of stuff. So let's make it really simple by first looking at the extremes. Some people need to eat every two or three hours. They feel this, "I need to eat every two or three hours," or else their blood sugar drops. In general, blood sugar doesn't drop so low, that they truly need to eat in order to alleviate a blood sugar issue. Although sometimes that can happen. Some people are truly hypoglycemic, low blood sugar. But most people as the blood sugar starts to head down towards the low-ish ranges, ghrelin is secreted. And so for those people not eating on the clock, it's very disruptive to them because it activates these neurons in the brain. For people who eat once a day or twice a day, or tend to shift their meals, you know, and they might eat a lot but during a limited so-called feeding window, it's kind of interesting humans now eat and talk about foods in ways that for years I used to hear about in classes, in courses, and research lectures about feeding animals, you know, restricted feeding windows. And we owe a great deal of gratitude to Satchin Panda, who was a colleague of mine when my lab was in San Diego at the Salk Institute, who really is one of the pioneers of this restricted feeding window work and has done a beautiful work. He has a book that's excellent called 'The Circadian Code' that I highly recommend. And he's done a lot of important work on neurons in the retina, that control circadian timing, but also the relationship between feeding windows and health. And he's sort of among the major proponents I should say, of circadian eating, that means eating during the daytime, not at night or intermittent fasting, restricting feeding windows to anywhere from four to six to eight hours. I'll use myself as an example of the transition from regular feeding schedule to a more intermittent-ish fasting, although I don't really fall into true intermittent fasting. So I was one of these people that just got so accustomed to waking up and eating about an hour after I woke up. That to go from eating every three or four hours to eating twice a day, lunch and dinner, maybe a couple of snacks in the afternoon or something. At first it was excruciating. I remember thinking like, this is really brutal pushing out feeding. I didn't think I could exercise unless I had eaten first. We now know that during most all forms of exercise unless you're really focused on optimal performance like you've got to hit key lifts or you have to sprint at your maximum speed. And maybe even then that you can exercise faster just fine, because you're mainly relying on sources like glycogen from the liver, some undigested food sometimes, as gross as that may seem it's true, as well as body fat if the exercise about is extremely long. But what that means is that if you suddenly go from eating on a very regular schedule to skipping a meal, or pushing your meal timing out or shifting at all, you're going to have ghrelin in your system. And that ghrelin is going to stimulate the desire to eat by acting at the level of your brain. And it is indeed at that point, just mental. When we hear about just mental, just physical, it's really kind of the same thing 'cause it's all chemicals, brain and body. But it's the stimulation of neurons that anticipate feeding. You're stimulating the arcuate nucleus neurons that make you want to eat those AgRP neurons. So ghrelin stimulates the AgRP neurons, which makes you want to eat. So what can you do with this? What this means is, if you want to start shifting your feeding schedule to one where you're not eating quite as frequently, and there are some advantages to that that aren't just in the biochemistry and health related, you know, cellar health related things. But some of them include not having to think about or buy food, right? You actually don't have to think about food all day if you're not eating so often. The other is, it gives you a far more social flexibility, right? You can go to a noon meeting if you have to or you can go out to dinner at a particular time. And you know, I guess it makes it kind of tough if you want to meet somebody for breakfast, 'cause then you're the dork who's just like sipping black coffee and like refusing everything. But anyway, I've been that dork. So it's one of those things you just kind of work with. But the fact of the matter is, ghrelin secretion, because of its relationship to the nervous system, can be shifted by about 45 minutes per day. Now, it's going to vary. Some of you have more so-called willpower, you know. But if you really want to just start pushing that first meal out or shifting in any direction, some people might want to eat in the early part of the day and not in the evening. Trying to shift the mealtimes out the spacing by about 45 minutes, is what the neural circuits that link the ghrelin system to the neural circuits that control feeding, really can handle because it's a form of neuroplasticity. And so what this would look like is, if you normally you eat breakfast at eight o'clock plus or minus 20 minutes, and you want to start eating your first meal at noon you would take maybe four or five days and just start pushing the meal out by about 45 minutes to an hour each day. So it's not quite as painful. Or you can just take the plunge and just do it all at once. I have a colleague who was a neurosurgeon at Stanford, came up through my lab, he's now at Neuralink, and he has a great practice. He keeps his ghrelin system at random. What he does is he skips one meal per day and he makes his external schedule dictate that. So, sometimes he skips breakfast, sometimes he skips lunch, sometimes he skips dinner, he just skips one of the three major meals per day. And in doing that, the ghrelin system has always kind of kept off kilter. And it probably also allows him to have a lot of neural flexibility, what we call top-down control. Just the knowledge, Oh, you know the hunger I'm feeling isn't necessarily hypoglycemia. And in his case, it's almost certainly not. And therefore what I'm feeling here is an activation of these AgRP neurons, and therefore I can push my meal schedule around however I want. Now, I should mention that top-down mechanisms are powerful. Belief, motivation, these things can really shift neural circuits. We're going to talk more about that a little bit later. But there are also people who are genuinely hypoglycemic and they need to take really good control of their blood sugar levels and try and keep them stable. And so of course, you want to do what's medically safe for you. I'm not at all recommending that people that suffer from hypoglycemia suddenly disrupt their blood sugar patterns in any direction, that wouldn't be healthy. But for most people out there who have reasonable blood glucose levels, it's kind of interesting and kind of fun to play with these parameters in order to optimize what you want to do. And sometimes that might change across the year with schedules. Many find great benefit in having flexibility over when they eat. Regularity of eating equals regularity of ghrelin secretion equals regularity of activity of these AgRP neurons, meaning you'll be hungry at very regular intervals. So that's something that you can work with, it's grounded in deep mechanism of hormone and neural systems, and there's a lot of modern research to support what I just said. So, if MSH inhibits feeding, makes us want to eat less and ghrelin makes us want to eat more, there's another hormone called CCK, Cholecystokinin, that is potent in reducing our levels of hunger. Now, I learned about CCK back when I was an undergraduate. So, well over 20 years ago, when it was first discovered. And there was a lot of excitement about CCK at that point as a diet drug. You know, anytime there's a molecule or a chemical discovered in the brain or body that can suppress feeding, the diet industry just goes wild and they think, this is going to be the thing that's going to allow people to move from being obese to losing all sorts of unhealthy weight, et cetera. A similar phenomenon was observed with leptin. Leptin is a hormone that's made by body fat that signals to the brain when there's a lot of body fat, and in animals injections of leptin can make fat animals thin. They lose a lot of adipose or fat. In humans, it didn't work out that way. It just the studies were done and leptin was successful in treating a certain rare form of diabetes, but it really wasn't very potent as an anti-obesity drug. Similarly, CCK has been looked at as an obesity drug, something to reduce obesity. But it had some pretty unhappy side effects actually caused some pretty serious side effects. Now that's as drug. However, CCK when released at normal levels by your gut has a powerful effect in suppressing appetite for a period of time. And there are healthy and direct ways to activate CCK. Now, CCK is in the GI tract, it's released from the GI tract. And it's release is governed by two things. One is a subset of very specialized neurons that detect what's in the gut, the specific contents of the gut. And by certain elements of the mucosa, of the mucus lining of the gut and the gut microbiome. So what's really interesting, is that CCK is stimulated by fatty acids and particular fatty acids that we'll talk about. Amino acids, and particular amino acids that we'll talk about, as well as by sugar. Now, let's put sugar on the shelf for a moment. We're going to talk a lot about sugar because if CCK inhibits appetite and reduces feeding, and it can be triggered by fatty acids, amino acids, or sugars, then you might say, well, then in eating a lot of sugars should make us not want to eat more, but we all know that eating sugar makes us want to eat far more. That's the role of a lot of sugars. And that has to do with a separate mechanism we'll talk about today. So, which fatty acids in the gut stimulate the release of CCK? It turns out it's the omega-3 fatty acids, the ones that come from algae or krill or fish oil. I talked about this in the episode on nutrition and some of the things related to the gut microbiome. And I'm going to revisit that now. Omega-3 fatty acids and Conjugated linoleic acid, CLA, either from food or from supplements, stimulate the release of CCK which then reduces, or at least blunts appetite. And I'm not talking about blunting appetite to anorexic levels where you don't want to eat at all. I'm talking about regulating appetite to the point where animals and people don't over-consume. So it's keeping appetite at a healthy level. The other thing that stimulates CCK that I mentioned, are amino acids. So when we eat, we have the ability to break down different macronutrients, you know, carbohydrates, fats or proteins, into sugars and glucose, that then we can convert to ATP and all that stuff from a Krebs cycle from high school. We're not going to go into that today, that's for a future episode. But amino acids are one of the things that we are eating for. Amino acids both can be used as energy through a process called gluconeogenesis, of converting proteins into energy. Or those amino acids can be broken down and then rebuilt into things like preparing, excuse me, repairing muscle tissue as well as other forms of cellar repair. They're involved in all sorts of things related to protein synthesis. What does this mean? If we eat the proper amino acids at the proper levels, if we ingest omega-3's and CLA's, Conjugated linoleic acids at the proper levels, or get them from supplements, there's a blunting of appetite. Appetite is kept clamped and we don't become hyperphagic. We don't overeat. We tend to eat within healthy or normal ranges. So this is very important, because most people don't understand that when we're eating, we are basically fat foraging and amino acid foraging. And there are several studies now have shown, that people and animals will essentially eat until they feel they've consumed enough omega-3's, omega-6's, CLA's, and certain amino acids. In other words, even if it's not conscious, we are eating until we trigger the activation of CCK. Now, there are other reasons why we shut down eating too. Are literally, the volume of food in our gut can be large, and we can feel very distended. That's the physical reason obviously. There are other reasons, maybe we just have top-down control. We have knowledge that this is the end of the meal and we stop 'cause we have to go back to work or to a meeting, or we tell ourselves we've had enough. But at a subconscious level, the gut is informing the brain via CCK and other mechanisms when we've ingested enough of what we need. And these omega-3's and CLA's and certain amino acids are vital for sending out that signal that we've had enough. Now, which amino acids is actually really interesting? We have essential amino acids and we have non-essential amino acids. Among the essential amino acids, there's one in particular that can trigger the release of CCK very potently, and that's glutamine. Glutamine is a very interesting amino acid. First of all, it's been shown in a few studies to play a role in bolstering the immune system. It can increase the number of killer cells in the immune system. It is consumed but in supplement form. You know, people can take it. You know, a teaspoon of glutamine or some people take glutamine throughout the day, if they're really into it or for whatever reason, they think they're battling off an infection or something of that sort. Glutamine can also of course be derived from foods. And you can just put into the Internet, do an Internet search and find out what foods are rich with glutamine. Some of the ones that I'm aware of off the top of my head are like cottage cheese, and things of that sort. But other foods have glutamine as well. Once a threshold level of glutamine and other essential amino acids are reached, once the threshold level of these Alpha-3, excuse me, Omega-3 fatty acids and CLA's are reached, CCK is released, and it helps reduce the activity of those AgRP neurons that promote feeding. So as you can see, feeding is an interplay between brain and body. And it's some of the micronutrients and even the breakdown of particular nutrients, that's putting the accelerator or the brake on the feeding process. It's not just one thing. So from an actionable standpoint, you, we should probably all be trying to get our omega-3, Omega-6 ratios correct anyway, because they are antidepressant. I talked about the peer reviewed studies on that. They are healthy for the gut microbiome, and we should be seeking sufficient glutamine. Now, whether or not you decide to supplement with glutamine or not, is up to you. One of the reasons why one might want to do that, and again, you should always check with a doctor, especially if you have any predisposition to cancers or you have cancer, many cancers and tumors like glutamine, so that's something to note. But one reason why you might want to supplement with glutamine or consider eating foods that are rich in glutamine, isn't just to keep your appetite in healthy ranges, but as well, glutamine can actually reduce sugar cravings. So this is very interesting. I have a friend, he's an absolute chocolate, sweets addict. He's a grown adult, but he eats candy and chocolate as if he was like a 14 year old kid hanging out at the local convenience store. It's really incredible. And he has probably a sugar addiction, but he's very aware of this and he's managed to kick all other addictions. So, for whatever reason, it stimulates his brain and body in the ways that make him want more, but he hates this. It's actually quite frustrating for him. He's somebody who cares a lot about his health. He took the approach that I know many other people have who know about this role of glutamine, of taking a teaspoon or a couple of teaspoons of glutamine several times throughout the day or anytime he craves sugar. And indeed, glutamine, well, reduced sugar cravings. Some people who are really on the kind of ketogenic front, will mix it with a little bit of half and half and down that, and because I guess it makes it taste better, it's a little bit chalky. So, glutamine has some very interesting properties. But I think for most people that aren't suffering from adverse levels of craving, making sure you're getting the right omega-3's that can come from a variety of sources, check out the episode we did on nutrition if you want to learn more about that. And CLA's, and making sure that you're getting enough glutamine is going to be important for making sure that the CCK signal gets through. The one thing I do want to mention about glutamine, it's a minor effect, but it alone can have a small increase, excuse me, it alone can increase blood sugar. It's not a huge increase in blood glucose. But because the gut takes proteins and breaks them down into these amino acids, and essentially looking for glutamine and things like it, other essential amino acids as well. When you ingest glutamine or branch chain amino acids, there is a small but real increase in blood glucose. And that's because they are essentially food. And there I'm talking about the supplemental version. So, just know glutamine can increase blood sugar slightly, especially diabetics should know that. It can reduce sugar cravings. And just know that what your gut is doing at a core level is it's forging, it's waiting, and it's trying to assess levels of omega-3 fatty acid, conjugated linoleic acid, and glutamine, and other essential amino acids. You are essentially trying to eat to get these nutrients and then a signal can be deployed up to your brain, that you're not really interested in eating that much more. Whenever preparing an episode for this podcast I'm always faced with a particular challenge, which is, how many tools should I offer that involve doing something new? You know, a new behavior, a new exercise, supplement, something, things of that sort. And how many should be related to not doing things, avoiding things. It's never really fun to talk about all the things that we're supposed to avoid, but some of them are so powerful in light of the mechanisms of a given topic that I'd be remiss if I didn't mention them. So now you understand how hormones, and peptides like CCK and ghrelin impact appetite. There's one particular aspect of food that can powerfully impact CCK. And I think most people, I'm guessing 99.9% of people out there are not aware of this. And it has to do with highly processed foods. There's a lot of reasons why one would want to avoid highly processed foods. In fact, if you're interested in that topic and the history of whole foods, transitioning to highly processed foods in this country, I highly recommend you listen to a YouTube video by Dr. Robert Lustig, he's at university of California, San Francisco. It's very easy to find, put Stanford, Robert Lustig, it was a talk hosted by Stanford. Gives a a beautiful description of the history of this, and why the food industry started packing in additional sugars and salts, and turning foods into commodities, it's really fascinating. It has no conspiracy theory is just all scientific facts. It's really a wonderful lecture. It has millions of views, it should be very easy to find. We can provide a link to that, and we will. There's another reason to avoid highly processed foods however, and that has to do with what's called emulsifiers. Now, many of you are familiar with emulsifiers, even though you don't know it. When you put detergent in the laundry that contains emulsifiers, the goal of that detergent is to bring together fatty molecules with water molecules and be able to dissociate them and break them up to get the stains out of clothes and things of that sort. There are a lot of emulsifiers put into processed foods. And those emulsifiers allow certain chemical reactions to occur that extends the shelf life of those foods. So it's like candy bars and cereals, and all sorts of things that are in processed foods. The worst of which are the typical kind of pastries that you see at the convenience store. But this extends into chips of various kinds and even some meats of various kinds, they pack this stuff into meats. They have names like soy lecithin and other things. Why are emulsifiers bad? Okay, there are a lot of reasons why they're bad, but the reason why they're bad for the mechanisms that we've been talking about today, is that when you ingest those foods, you're bringing those emulsifiers into your gut. And those emulsifiers strip away the mucosal lining of the gut, and they actually cause the neurons that innervate the gut, that extend those little processes we call axons into the gut, to retract deeper into the gut. And as a consequence, you're ingesting a bunch of food and the signals like CCK never get deployed. The signals that actually shut down hunger are never actually triggered. And so, as a consequence you want to eat far more of these highly processed foods. In addition, if you then go from eating a highly processed food to non highly processed foods, you're not able to measure the amounts of amino acids, sugars, and fatty acids in those foods as accurately. You've actually done structural damage at a micro level, but structural level damage, excuse me, to the mucosal lining of the gut. Now, this can all be repaired if you stay away from highly processed foods for some period of time. But the negative effects of these emulsifiers are quite real. So, to make it really clean and simple, emulsifiers from highly processed foods are limiting your guts ability to detect what's in the foods you eat and therefore to deploy the satiety signals, the signals that shut down hunger. In addition to that, there's a parallel mechanism at play, that I talked about in a previous episode but I'll remind you again, that you have neurons in your gut that are sensing sugar, and are sending a subconscious signal up to the brain via the vagus nerve. And those neurons trigger the release of dopamine, which makes you crave more of that food. So now you've got parallel signals making you want to eat more sugar, making you unaware of how much sugar you've eaten, and that are disrupting the inputs to the nervous system that signal to the rest of your brain and body that you've obtained enough fatty acids and you've obtained enough amino acids. So these highly processed foods are really terrible. And you know, I'm not out here to say, you know, never enjoy a processed food of any kind, I'd be a hypocrite 'cause I do eat processed foods from time to time. Although the ones that I tend to eat, I try and make of the healthier variety. But eating whole foods has tremendous value and eating highly processed food has tremendous negative impact on the gut and on the gut brain axis. And so, recently there was a paper that came out in Cell, Cell Press journal, it's kind of the apex of Cell journals, which is a phenomenal. This paper showed that, ingesting highly processed food leads to more intake of not just highly processed foods but other types of food in general. There was kind of an overeating compensation generally across foods for people that consume these highly processed foods. And there are a lot of other reasons to avoid highly processed foods. So again, I don't like to focus too much on the do nots, I like to arm you with tools to do. But I think this visual of certain foods and these emulsifiers actually stripping away some of the critical lining of your gut and disrupting the hormone signaling to the brain controlling feeding, is important enough and cryptic enough, meaning it hasn't been talked about, it works at a subconscious level, and that it's important that people are aware of it so they can make decisions about what they do want to eat or not want to eat for themselves. Before moving on, I just want to say one more thing about highly processed foods. There was an absolutely beautiful study done by my colleague, Chris Gardner at Stanford, exploring whether or not certain diets were better than others. They looked at vegan, vegetarian, omnivore, I don't know if they looked at all meat or not, but they looked at the different forms of diets, intermittent fasting, et cetera. And they essentially found that, whichever diet people adhered to, whichever one they followed, was equivalent to the others. Provided that they followed it, they lost the equivalent amount of weight. There really wasn't a strong effect of the food type or the pattern of eating, et cetera. However, in a study like that, adherence is very high because people are a part of a study. And for many people, the ability to adhere to a certain eating plan is one of the most, if not the most powerful determinants of whether or not a given diet meaning nutritional plan works. Now, this thing about highly processed foods however, is really diabolical. Because it truly says, and I think the recent data in cell metabolism and other journals really proves that, a calorie is not a calorie. That's absolutely absurd because of these emulsifiers and the contents of these highly processed foods. In fact, the data in humans points to this. So what they did is they took in-patient adults, so they had total control over their food intake. And they received either ultra processed or unprocessed diets for 14 days, as a short study. The diets were matched for calories, sugar, fat, fiber, and macronutrients. So everything else was matched. Just processed or non-processed is the major variable. And basically what they found, is that the people who are eating the processed food diet happened to eat much more, right? This was after this period of putting them on either diet and clamping for all other variables. Then they would eat much more, and the body weight changes were much more. And those body weight changes, were such that they couldn't be accounted for by just increased calories. So, the bottom line is that highly processed foods are just bad for you. They increase weight gain. They disrupt the lining of your gut in a way that disrupts things like CCK and proper satiety signals. And they contain a bunch of things, in particular sugars, but other things as well, that disrupt not just the hormonal systems but also the neural systems that control the desire to eat after the diet is done. So there's just so many reasons why these highly processed foods are terrible, and they can explain a lot of the ill health effects that we've seen in the last 50 years not just in the United States, but all over the world. That enormous increase in diabetes, juvenile diabetes. It's just remarkable how far down the path of diet we've gone. And it's clear, it's almost a smoking gun what the cause of this is. If you'd like to learn more about that please refer to the Lustig lecture. He also spells out why non-processed foods is far more economical in terms of just at the level of the household or individual as well as at the societal level. Really interesting stuff, I highly recommend you check it out. So now let's move on to some other hormones that regulate hunger and satiety, in particular insulin. Now, you've probably heard of insulin before. Insulin is the thing that's lacking in type I diabetics, that's why they have to inject insulin whenever they eat. The reason they have to do that, is because when they eat their foods are broken down into glucose. And in order to shuttle glucose to the appropriate tissues in the body, and also to keep glucose levels in check, you need insulin. So the simplest way to think about insulin and glucose is that when you eat, that food is broken down into sugars, that's true whether or not it's fats or it's sugars, or eventually if it's proteins, they are oxidized into fuels as we say. And those fuels can be used as the name fuel implies into energy, they're eventually made into ATP. There's a bunch of biochemical steps there we're not going to go into today, but that's essentially how it works. You break down food into glucose. Now, if you're ketogenic, we'll talk about that in a little bit. But in general, you eat, food is turned into glucose. Your blood sugar needs to be kept in a particular range. Hypoglycemic means too low, hyperglycemic means too high. And what they called euglycemic E-U, glycemic, is the healthy range. Now, what those healthy ranges are, in general the healthy range, the euglycemic range, is about 70 to a hundred nanograms per deciliter. But most of you aren't walking around with a glucose monitor. Some of you are, but most of you are not. The more important question for us to address right now, is why is it important that glucose be kept at a particular level? Once you understand that, keeping glucose in check starts to have a rationale behind it and the ways to do that start to make a lot more sense. So the reason is, if glucose levels get too high because of the way that our cells in particular neurons, interact with glucose, high levels of glucose can damage neurons. It can actually kill them. You can start getting what are called peripheral, excuse me, neuropathies. One of the symptoms of some forms of diabetes is that people start losing the sensation of touch in their fingers or their hands or their feet, and they can start going blind. There's diabetic retinopathies. So it's very important, that insulin manage your glucose levels. Now, there's also type II diabetes where there's insulin secreted from the pancreas, but people are insulin insensitive. There's a disruption in the receptors and insulin insensitivity isn't quite the same as having no insulin at all, but it parallels some of the same mechanisms. Now, type I diabetes is often picked up because someone has a sudden weight loss, because they're not processing blood sugar the same way they were before. Type II diabetes is often, although not always associated with being overweight and with obesity. Both of them are challenging conditions. Type II diabetes almost always can be managed by managing one's weight. And of course there are prescription drugs and supplements that can help manage those. We're going to talk about all of that. But for most people that don't have diabetes, the important thing is to manage glucose, to keep it in that euglycemic range. And there are a number of different ways to do that. Some of them are behavioral, some of them are diet based, and some of them are based on supplements or prescription drugs. So let's talk about those now. So if you eat, and in particular if you eat carbohydrates, blood glucose goes up. If you eat fats, blood glucose goes up to a far less degree. And if you eat proteins, depending on the protein, it will eventually be broken down for fuel or assembled into amino acid chains for protein synthesis and repair of other tissues and bodily functions. But glucose goes up and then is kept in range. When you are hungry, you secrete a different hormone and that's called glucagon. And glucagon's main role, is to pull stores of energy out of the liver and the muscles. And once those are depleted, you'll eventually tap into body fat, okay? So, and this is for people that have a typical blood glucose range, so that 70 to 100 euglycemic range. So, the two kind of push and pull systems that we're going to think about now to keep this simple, is that you have the insulin system managing glucose, and you've got the glucagon system pulling energy out of your liver and muscles for immediate fuel. And eventually you'll pull fuel out of body fat if you've been active for a very long time and all your glycogen stores are depleted or close to depleted. So what does this all mean? There's a lot of important biochemistry and a lot of important cellar processes involved in whether or not your anabolic or catabolic. Whether or not you're breaking things down or building things up. Let's talk about feeding in a simpler way, however. And let's weave the tools to manage blood glucose, to keep it in check, as we do that. So, let's say you had a meal and that meal consisted of rice, a carbohydrate, some meat or fish, let's say a piece of salmon, and some vegetable, some fibrous vegetable like asparagus or cabbage or something like that. If you were to eat all of that at once, you know, you take a bite of one, a bite of the other, you're going to mix it up. You know, one of these, it all ends up in the same place kind of people, mix it all up. Then you'll experience an increase in insulin and increase in blood glucose that's moderately fast. It's going to increase pretty quickly. What's remarkable, is that the order that you consume each macro-nutrient has a pretty profound influence on the rate of insulin and glucose secretion into the blood and how quickly those levels rise. So if you will make it really simple. If you were to eat the rice first, your glucose would rise in a sharp spike, especially if it doesn't contain any fats to slow the absorption. Now, that might be good if you're very hungry and you want to get an increase in glucose. In fact, this is the reason why you're often served bread before meals, because it is... And sometimes it's bread and butter, or chips before meals or appetizers, are designed to get your blood glucose going up high because big steep increases in blood glucose tend to promote the desire to consume more glucose. And this also relates to the dopamine system and the way that something tasty in the mouth and sugar in the gut and fats and sugars in the mouth, trigger the activation of a lot of systems in the brain and body to consume more of whatever you have or whatever is available to you. So, the basic idea is that eating carbohydrates and/or fats early in a meal will give a steep rise in blood glucose. However, if you were to eat the fibrous thing first, so a lot of chewing, but not a big rise in blood glucose because in general there's... Unless it's laid in with sugar. Or something we're just talking about some vegetable, fibrous vegetable, that will actually blunt the release of glucose until you eat the fish and the rice. But believe it or not it will actually blunt the glucose increase that the rice would cause. Now, I'm not talking about neurotically eating each macro-nutrient separately in sequence. I'm just trying to give you a picture of what's happening ordinarily. So what this means is, if you feel a lot of food related anxiety, or you feel you're one of these people that you can kind of sense like your blood sugar increasing very quickly, a lot of people can sense this, some people can't, has a lot to do with how well they manage their blood sugar as well as some of the psychological factors. And yes, their family and historical reasons, you know, I've got friends who had a lot of siblings, and when they sit down to eat they have to really suppress the desire to not beat up everyone else at the table and take all the food. It's sort of like not... It's hard for them to understand that there's plenty to go around, because of their upbringing. So there are psychological top-down effects. A lot of the psychology around food is geared towards getting people to be relaxed when they eat and these sorts of things. But these blood sugar effects are real just cellar and basic biochemistry of how the body manages sugars ingested into the blood. So what does this all mean? It means that if you want a steep increase in glucose, you are very, very hungry, then you should eat the carbohydrate laid in food first, or you should eat a bunch of macronutrients combined. So that would be like the hamburger or the sandwich, the bread, the whatever's in that sandwich altogether, usually that's protein and vegetables as well. If you want to have a more modest increase in glucose or you want to blunt the increase in glucose, then have the, at least some of the fibrous thing first, and then the protein and then the carbohydrate. You will notice that your blood glucose will rise more steadily, and that you'll achieve satiety earlier in the meal. Or at least you won't get this huge peak at sort of the Thanksgiving meal effect. Some of you are international, so if you don't celebrate Thanksgiving is a time of year where... It used to be the one-time a year or two times a year where Americans would give themselves permission to eat enormous meals. Now that seems to happen a lot more often. But there is this effect of you're full and yet you're hungry for more, that's because your blood glucose has gone through the roof and it's triggered a number of other mechanisms. There's also usually a lot of alcohol consumption, and alcohol itself because it's a sugar will increase blood glucose very, very sharply. It depends on the alcohol, some alcohols have more sugar than others. But basically what you're trying to avoid are steep increases in blood sugar. And the order that you eat foods has an enormous impact on that. The other thing that has an enormous impact on how long and shallow, or how steep that curve of glucose is, depends on on whether or not you recently were moving, are moving or start moving after you eat. So it turns out that your blood glucose levels can be modulated very, very powerfully by movement. If you did any kind of intense exercise, or even just walking or jogging, or cycling anything before you eat your blood glucose levels will be dampened somewhat. And that has to do with the release of something called, some people call it GLUT4, which sounds like glutton. Other people call it GLUT4. These are things that are involved in shuttling glucose to particular cells in the body, namely toward muscle and glycogen stores and away from body fat stores. It has to do with sequestering of glucose from the blood. The point is that, if you're somebody who struggles with blood sugar regulation, in addition to getting your body weight in a healthy range, doing all the other sorts of things that you should be doing, the key thing is to try and get some movement, sometime as circuit meal. Now, very few people can actually eat and walk at the same time, although I do it all the time. Not because I'm trying to regulate my blood sugar but just 'cause I tend to be busy. I eat and drive, [mumbles] busy. Busy if I'm not giving this podcast, or if sleeping, I'm eating, but except the early part of the day when I fast. But the bottom line here is that, if you, for instance take a 30 minute walk after a meal, your blood glucose will be blunted in ways that are beneficial. If you have exercised in the recent hours before a meal, that can be beneficial. The order that you consume foods is beneficial. And there are a few things that you can consume that can also adjust blood glucose levels. So let's talk about those, but I thought it was important to really tamp down that it's not just what you eat, we talked about that before, but also the order that you eat those things, believe it or not, whether or not you combine macro-nutrients, carbohydrates, proteins and fats and fibrous vegetables. And whether or not you've moved recently. The higher intensity the movement, the greater the GLUT4 increase, and the more that the blood glucose will be blunted and you'll shuttle more of that to glycogen and muscle stores. And even just moving after a meal, even just a calm easy walk, can really adjust the ways in which blood sugar regulated for the better. I don't want to perseverate on this processed foods, hidden sugars thing too much. But understanding now a little bit about how insulin and glucose work, you can probably imagine why hidden sugars are such an attractive thing from the standpoint of processed food manufacturers. Because if they can put sugar in that you can't even taste, that sugar is going to amplify the amount of glucose, it's going to increase the rate of glucose increase into your bloodstream and it's going to promote more feeding. So in that case, you're really being tricked. It's not that you're actually reaching for the additional appetizer and your blood glucose is going up. The food that you ate is actually increasing your appetite as you eat it. It's a positive feedback loop. So don't want to demonize those any more than I already have, but you should be aware that these things are happening at the level of your bloodstream and brain. The other thing I'd like to address for a moment, is this notion of stable blood sugar versus lay bile blood sugar or unstable blood sugar. Some people just have stable blood sugar. They can go long periods of time without eating and feel fine. Other people get really shaky, really jittery, and/or when they do eat, they feel really keyed up. Sometimes they'll even sweat. Sometimes their vision will go blurry. And some of that can actually be because they've become hyperglycemic. And those effects that you experience when you are hyperglycemic are the early warning signs of the kinds of things that damage neurons and lead to the really terrible stuff they talked about before like peripheral neuropathies. Now, it takes some time for those things to occur, those neuropathies to occur. But whether or not your blood sugar is all over the place or whether or not stable, can be impacted by a number of things. One of those things is exercise. So these days there's a lot of interest in what they call zone two cardio, which is that kind of steady state cardio, where you can just nasal breathe even at pretty high output, where you could maybe have a conversation. Although I'm such a huge proponent of nasal breathing during exercise, most forms of exercise especially zone two cardio, that you probably shouldn't be talking while you're doing that cardio unless it's absolutely essential. But periods of zone two cardio that lasts anywhere from 30 minutes to an hour or sometimes more for your endurance athletes, can create positive effects on blood sugar regulation, such that you people can sit down and enjoy whatever it is, the hot fudge sundae, or whatever the high sugar content food is. And blood glucose management is so good. Your insulin sensitivity is so high, which is a good thing, that you can manage that blood glucose to the point where it doesn't really make you shaky, it doesn't disrupt you. And you know, to say nothing of the weight-related issues or the adipose fat gain, et cetera, that's a separate issue because people vary there. But basically doing zone two cardio for 30 to 60 minutes, three to four times a week makes your blood sugar really stable, and that's an attractive thing for a variety of reasons. On the flip side, high intensity interval training or resistance training AKA weight training, are very good at stimulating the various molecules that promote repackaging of glycogen. So sprints, heavy weight lifting, circuit type weightlifting provided there is some reasonable degree of resistance, those are going to trigger are all sorts of mechanisms that are going to encourage the body to shuttle glucose back into glycogen, converting to glycogen, into muscle tissue, restock the liver, et cetera. Depleting one's glycogen actually takes some time. You know, if you do a couple sets of tricep extensions and some crunches, you're not depleting your glycogen. Glycogen depleting workouts are very high intensity. Generally they're less than an hour or so, but those are the sort that are going to lead to big increases in the kinds of enzymes and metabolic pathways that are going to repack glycogen and shuttle most things towards restorage of foods not into adipose tissue, not into fat, but taking glucose and making it into fuels that you can access later for more of that high intensity activity. And I should mention that one of the advantages of high intensity interval training or weightlifting of various kinds, is that it causes long standing increases in basal metabolic rate. I don't want to go too far down this path because we're going to do an entire month on human performance and athletic performance. But it's not just the increases in muscle that increase metabolism, because muscle burns more energy than other types of tissues, except your brain, which truly burns the most energy. Anyway is the main reason why your basal metabolic rate is what it is. Well, high-intensity training. So it could be sprints, it could be high intensity interval training of different kinds, it could be weight training, also has an effect of increasing thermogenesis even long after you've completed the exercise. So there's a long tail. There's a kind of post exercise metabolic effect that's also beneficial. So it's not an either or, it's really that high intensity interval training and resistance training. And things of that sort are very good for one reason. And the zone two cardio is very good for other reasons. And now you can see why it's just a healthy thing and why most people should probably be doing exercise most days of the week, if not every day of the week. If your goal is to manage blood glucose and your goal is to manage some of the metabolic factors that control repackaging of glycogen and encouraging excess glucose to not get diverted into body fat stores. We haven't talked a lot about lipids today, that's because most of today's discussion is about hormones and insulin is the dominant hormone in terms of mobilizing and managing glucose in the body, at least for most people. But fats are very important. And there's just a little anecdote about fats that I think will be useful in thinking about why you want to manage what they call the LDL or HDL ratios. And this is deserving an entire episode, many, perhaps even several episodes. But some of you may be familiar with LDLs and HDLs, some of you may not. The LDL is low density lipoprotein. This is the one that you don't want it to be too high. Castillo's dreaming, he's barking. He loves all forms of cholesterol but that's just Castillo dreaming. So LDLs are the ones that you want to keep low. You don't want those to go excessively high. HDLs, the high density lipoproteins are the ones that are the so-called healthy lipoproteins. That's all fine and good. But you might ask yourself, what are they doing? What is the actual role of these things, and why would you want healthy levels of HDL and not too much LDL? Well, one of the reasons is, that fats don't like water, right? They are hydrophobic. And yet you need to move fats in your bloodstream, all tissues in your body need fats. They need cholesterols, they're... In last episode we talked about cholesterol is a precursor to the sex steroid hormones, estrogen, and testosterone and other hormones as well. Well, HDL and LDL, actually coat fats to allow them to be transported through the bloodstream. They do a number of other things as well. But HDL, is a key component of the delivery system that brings those fats to the liver, ovaries, testes, and adrenals. In other words, having adequate levels of HDL is good, because it allows fats to be delivered to the tissues that manufactured testosterone, estrogen, cortisol in healthy levels and the liver. So this is why when LDLs are too high what's happening is you're not getting fats to the correct tissues. And you can get buildup of fats like fatty liver disease and some of these things can happen. A high sugar content can even lead to some of these fatty liver conditions that starting to happen is actually the first time in human history perhaps that we're aware of anyway. That we're starting to see liver conditions that normally were associated only with severe alcoholism starting to come from sugar content. So what does this mean? This means keep your LDL and HDL ratios proper. You want those HDLs in order to deliver fatty molecules to the very tissues that use cholesterol in order to manufacturer hormones. So how do you keep LDLs and HDLs in their proper ratios? Well, a lot of people don't realize this, but the debate about dietary cholesterol and its relationship to LDL and HDL ratios, it is a barbed wire debate. I don't want to get into it right now. There are still a lot of open questions as to how much dietary cholesterol impacts LDL and HDL ratios. I don't want to get into that now, I'm not taking a stance either way. But what is very clear, is that having highly elevated glucose, consuming too much sugar or not managing glucose in your body through some of the mechanisms that we've been talking about up until now, can also negatively impact LDL, HDL ratios. So managing glucose goes way beyond just managing blood sugar, and making sure that you don't lay down too much body fat, making sure your metabolism stays high and making sure you're not getting jittery at meals. It also has to do with making sure that you're creating enough of the molecules HDL and not too many of the molecules LDL, that are going to disrupt the delivery of things to the organs of your body that allow you to make healthy levels of testosterone, estrogen, and so forth. If that wasn't clear, let me make this ultra simple. You want healthy levels of HDL, and you want low levels of LDL, because if you have ovaries it will allow the fats that need to get to the ovary to produce estrogen, to get there. And if you have testes, it will allow the fats and the cholesterol molecules that you need in order to manufacture testosterone to get to the testes. As well, in order to have proper adrenal function and proper liver function, you want HDL and LDL in the healthy correct levels. So now we've talked a lot about behavioral tools and the underlying biological mechanisms that justify those tools in particular circumstances. Now, I'd like to turn to supplements and prescription drugs that regulate the hormone systems, controlling feeding and satiety. There are a huge number of these. Some have more powerful effects than others. There are two that I want to describe because they've been getting a lot of attention recently. First of all, there's a prescription drug Metformin, which was developed as a treatment for diabetes. And it works potently to reduce blood glucose. It has dramatic effects in lowering blood glucose. Metformin involves changes to mitochondrial action in the liver. That's its main way of depleting or reducing blood glucose. And it does so through the so-called AMPK pathway, and it increases insulin sensitivity overall. Metformin is a powerful drug. In fact, I'm surprised that so many people have sought it out, given that most of the people that I'm aware of that sought it out are not diabetic. I think for diabetics it seems to be a useful drug. For non-diabetics, it can also of course, lower blood glucose. It also has the potential to make people hypoglycemic, genuinely hypoglycemic. So, you really need to approach Metformin with caution. I get a little concern when I hear about people blasting Metformin, simply because fasted states or low blood sugar states are healthy. Doing that pharmacologically can have long standing effects. You really want to approach that with caution. Now, there's a comparable drug, it really should be called a drug. But it's non-prescription, that's also in fairly prominent use out there called berberine, B-E-R B-E-R-I-N-E, berberine, correct. So berberine is a really interesting compound. Its actions very much mimic Metformin. So let's talk about berberine for a second. Berberine actually comes from various plants and tree bark. It is sold in supplement stores, it's sold online. It is, as far as I know unregulated, it is powerful. If you're going to experiment with berberine, you definitely want to talk to your doctor and you want to approach it with caution. It also works to activate the so-called AMPK pathway. AMPK by the way stands for Adenosine Monophosphate-activated protein kinase, AMPK. And it inhibits a protein tyrosine phosphates 1B pathway. I think that's enough nomenclature. It activates a certain pathway that's associated with fasting and low blood glucose. The effects of berberine are as far as I can tell, when looking at the literature, are very similar if not identical to Metformin. Now, the number of studies out there on this are many. So I'm just going to review a few of them and their major effects. As always, I invite you to check out examine.com. It's a wonderful website where you can put in any supplement or compound or biological goal for that matter. And it will list out the various effects in the human effect matrix. So studies on humans, if they're available. And it will tell you whether or not they're strong effects or weak effects or modest effects. And it will point to the specific subject population, it's a wonderful resource. So berberine, not surprisingly has very strong effects in lowering blood glucose. There are four studies on this. In fact, they say that berberine is one of the more if not the most effective supplements for lowering blood glucose. It talks about dosages there. Although I'll just mention that I've tried berberine, and the dosages that are typical on the bottle of most supplements, is much higher than I needed. So when I took berberine, two things happened, first of all, I got a pretty splitting headache. It gave me pretty vicious headache. So for me it was a no, almost immediately. The other thing is, I became so hypoglycemic. That in order to get my blood sugar back up, I think I ate something like 10 donuts and I didn't feel like I had ingested all that much sugar. It was really kind of weird. I was hyperphagic for sugar. I was craving sugar, craving sugar and I was very thirsty as well. And so, I don't want to promote any bad behavior, but I know that certain people use this when they've overeaten sugars or they're doing their cheat days, something that I'm personally just not a fan of. And they want to keep their blood sugar in check or they know they're going to consume a huge meal. They'll take berberine to keep blood glucose clamped. And it does do that. It has very strong effects. Three peer reviewed studies on HbA1c levels. HbA1c is something that can be measured in a blood test. That is sort of an average readout of your blood sugar levels over the previous two or three months, sometimes shorter period. But that's mostly what HbA1c is about. So, it radically decreases your blood sugar levels. It actually lowers cholesterol. It acts remember on the liver, and the liver is involved in cholesterol metabolism. And remember it's both sugars, blood glucose, and dietary fats. Perhaps it's still heavily debated in terms of how your blood total cholesterol HDL and LDL are regulated. So it seems to lower total cholesterol, and it seems like it lowers HDL and LDL in parallel. So that's interesting. One study showed a minor increase in HDL, the so-called good cholesterol. Insulin levels dropped, not surprising. Another study showed a slight decrease in LDL, though seem to be kind of minor. Here's a kind of interesting one, just to help you remember berberine as of the fact that it comes from tree bark, isn't trigger enough to remember it. Direct contact of berberine on canker sores seems to eliminate canker sores very quickly, which is kind of cool. I've not had canker sores in a few years but when I dig down, they're extremely painful. I don't like those. So that's kind of interesting, and there's some study references there. I find it amazing that these compounds exist. You've got this prescription drug Metformin, and then you've got berberine, this stuff from tree bark, and they have effects that are essentially equivalent to one another. So again, I'm not promoting their use or even their exploration, but those compounds do exist, they're out there. And check out examine.com if you'd like to learn more. Certainly do your reading, do your homework, before you start just popping the stuff. And if you have hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia, be especially careful and also do understand that dosages and dose requirements vary. So if you do go down this path, really approach things carefully. Always start with the lowest amount that you could get away with. For me, the headache thing just made it a no-go. I do keep a bottle of it in a full disclosure, in the odd chance that I feel like eating a ton of doughnuts. It's not so much about not ingesting the calories, it's just that I don't like the feeling of being hyperglycemic, the blurry vision, just feeling lousy, I do love donuts. Other things that impact blood glucose in supplement form. Chromium has been shown in 29 studies to have a minor, I want to emphasize a minor effect on reducing blood glucose. Things like L-carnitine, something we've talked about here on the podcast before in terms of its relationship to power output in ATP production for both aerobic and anaerobic exercise, as well as sperm quality and egg quality. We talked about that long ago. Things like Panax ginseng can have positive effects on, I should say, can have effects of reducing blood glucose slightly. I don't want to give a valence to or judgment to whether or not it's positive or negative. Here's something that's interesting that you should know about. Caffeine has very reliably been shown to increase blood glucose just a little bit, okay? So I always thought that caffeine would drop blood glucose, but it actually can increase blood glucose just slightly. Things like magnesium. We talked about magnesium as a tool for enhancing the passage into sleep, in particular magnesium threonate and bisglycinate. Magnesium can also have a modest reduction in blood glucose. You're just trying to get the impression, everything reduces blood glucose, but that's certainly not the case. And then a couple episodes ago when we were discussing nutrition we talked about artificial sweeteners, sucralose, aspartame, NutraSweet. Some of those are generic names. Some of those might be brand names and how they have negative effects on the gut microbiome and that's supported by a number of studies. There's one artificial sweetener, it's stevia, S-T-E-V-I-A, which seems to lower blood glucose just slightly. And I still can't find data on whether or not Stevia impacts the gut microbiome in either direction. Many of the things that I consume do have small amounts of Stevia in them. So I'd love to know if anyone out there is aware of quality peer reviewed research, as to whether or not Stevia impacts the gut microbiome similarly or differently from other artificial sweeteners. Please let me know. Please send me the references. I'd really appreciate it if put it in the comment section on YouTube or elsewhere. Comment section on YouTube would be the best place. So Stevia seems to lower blood glucose a little bit, which makes it kind of an attractive artificial sweetener if one is going to use artificial sweeteners. But remember, sweet taste itself stimulates the desire to eat, which will increase more blood glucose. So I'm guessing that they probably cancel each other out. So you have to think logically about these things. Vitamin B3, so some of the B vitamins do indeed stimulate appetite by triggering increases in blood glucose, vitamin B3 in particular. I don't know if B6 does. Things like zinc seem to lower blood glucose. And then there've been an enormous number of other things that have been tested for their roles in blood glucose. Apple cider vinegar, anything acidic. This is well-known now that any kind of acidity, so it could be lemon juice or lime juice, or Apple cider vinegar, lowers blood glucose slightly. Some of those can also have other effects that we're not talking about today. So that's kind of interesting because there's a movement now towards creating a sort of people talk about becoming more alkaline, you know, what these... I hate to break it to you but you don't really want your body to be too alkaline. You want to stay in the right pH or else you're start... There are conditions that make you more alkaline. You don't want to be too acidic or too alkaline. If you see a beverage or something that purports that ingesting that beverage is going to make you more alkaline, that is absolutely false. There's no evidence for that, is impossible biochemically. It's just marketing. But nonetheless ingesting foods that are acidic can make some slight adjustments to the pH of the gut in ways that can slow or alter the absorption of foods and can blunt blood glucose. You can try this sometime if you want, if ever you're feeling kind of over sugared out like you ate something with too much sugar. You can drink a small amount of lemon juice mixed with water or lime juice, and you'll notice that it will blunt that kind of hyperglycemic effect just a little bit. Again, you don't want to use this as a medical tool, but the effect is fairly potent. And then, excuse me. And then there are a number of other things like capsaicin and hot chili peppers that will lower blood glucose. The list goes on and on, The most powerful one is absolutely berberine and Metformin, but that's really heavy caliber stuff. And the other ones I mentioned have more minor effects. I do want to mention because I'm sure some of you out there are curious about the ketogenic diet. I'm going to do an entire episode about ketosis and the brain and the body, but the ketogenic diet has been shown in 22 studies to have a notable decrease on blood glucose. And that is not surprising, because the essence of the ketogenic diet is that you're consuming very little or zero of the foods that promote big spikes in insulin and glucose. If you consume enough protein, some of that protein can be converted into glucose, of course, through gluconeogenesis. But the ketogenic diet has a very strong support for its role in regulating blood sugar, which is glucose. But the specific effects of the ketogenic diet, and one particular effect that I'll address later but I'll mention now, which is, the ability of the ketogenic diet to adjust thyroid hormone levels in ways that make it such that if you return to eating carbohydrates after being in ketosis for too long, you don't manage fibroid and carbohydrates as well, that has been shown as well. So we're going to dive deep into ketosis in a future episode. So for you ketonistas does out there don't worry, I certainly have nothing against ketogenic diet. I actually don't have anything for against any particular nutrition plan. I know it works for me, at least at this stage in my life. And I'll update it if I need to. I'm simply trying to get you as much information as I possibly can, so that you can navigate through that landscape in a way that's in keeping with your particular goals. So now you understand a lot about blood sugar and how it's managed, and the ways that you can manage it better depending on your particular needs. This is also a good opportunity for us to look back at some of the medical literature, because it really points to just how far we've come in terms of understanding these important mechanisms. And it points us in the direction of some actionable protocols. So diabetes, which is these huge increases in blood glucose, because there's no insulin, was known about as early as 1500 BC, which is just incredible. And the way physicians then understood that certain people had high blood glucose without actually knowing what blood glucose was, is that they would take the urine of particular patients, and they'd find that ants preferably move toward and consume the urine of certain patients and not others. And they understood that there was something in that urine that was correlated with the weight loss and some of the other probably very unfortunate health symptoms that these people were experiencing. So they knew that there was something in blood and urine. But you might be asking yourself, wait, that's urine. But as I tell every kid that I meet, two things. I tell a kid, your brain is here, I make them point to their head. And then I tell them, do you know what? Do you know that your urine is actually filtered blood? And they usually go, [grunts]. I get parental permission to do this first. But most adults don't realize that your urine is actually just filtered blood. And that's why if you see blood in your urine, that's a problem. You want to filter the blood, but urine is filtered blood. Now, this business of measuring blood sugar from the urine has been something that lasted way beyond these early stages of 1500 BC. It turns out that as late as 1674, physicians at Oxford university were figuring out who had pathologically high levels of blood glucose by analyzing their urine. And again, they were measuring the sweetness of their urine, and this is medical fact. They would do this by taking urine samples from different patients, and tasting them. And they developed an intuitive sense of what excessively sweet urine was relative to the other urines that they had tasted. So for those of you that are in the medical profession or those of you that are seeking out the medical profession, do you understand this is not done anymore? And you can also just reflect on how far we've come in terms of the medical profession itself. In our ability to measure things from the blood and measure things from urine without having to ask ants which urine is sweeter or ask oneself, which urine is sweeter. So indeed we are making progress as a species. Before we close out today I want to talk about one more tool that many of you will probably find useful. I certainly have, I'm a big consumer of caffeine, although I don't consume a ton of it, I consume it very consistently. So I'm big on consuming Mate, which is a strong caffeinated tea. And I generally do that early in the day. Although I do delay about two hours after I wake up for reasons I've talked about in previous episode, to maintain that nice arc of alertness and focus. I do drink black coffee as well, mushroom coffee as well, I love that stuff. But Mate, also called Yerba Mate, is an interesting compound because unlike coffee, it has been shown to increase something called glucagon like peptide GLP1. And increase leptin levels. Now, we didn't talk a lot about glucagon today. Glucagon is really elevated in the fasting state. I mentioned that it's sort of the opposite of insulin in kind of rough terms that's one way to think about it. But GLP1, or glucagon-like peptide one, is increased by ingesting Mate and it acts as a pretty nice appetite suppressant. Now, I'm not trying to suppress my appetite. I like to eat as I mentioned before. But it works really well to stimulate the brain and to give you a level of alertness and to do a lot of the things that coffee does. It also contains electrolytes. So we meaning our neurons and our brain run on a variety of factors, electrical activity and chemical transmission, et cetera, but they require adequate levels of sodium potassium and magnesium. So, if you were to learn the biology or the physiology of the action potential, the firing of a neuron, something we teach every first year neuroscience student, and I'd be happy to teach you if you're interested. You'll hear about sodium rushing into cells and potassium entering and leaving cells in order to allow neurons to communicate. Electrolytes are critically important for the function of the nervous system. And many things that act as diuretics, that promote excretion of water, like caffeine, can also take electrolytes out along with in particular sodium. And sometimes the lightheadedness or the brain fog that people experience, isn't just because electrolytes are low but because they're kind of out of balance. So I like Mate because it has electrolytes, it has caffeine. It stimulates the release of this glucagon-like peptide GLP1, and it's been a big help to me in extending that early morning fasting window out to about noon or so when I eat my first meal. It also just tastes really good. I don't drink it out of the gourd even though I have Argentine lineage. The gourd to me it's just kind of an inconvenience, I drink it out of a mug. There's no promotion here. I have no relationship to any Yerba Mate plantations or companies, I just happen to really like the stuff. And the fact that glucagon-like peptide one is enriched or is released more when you drink Mate. And the fact that GLP1 can regulate blood sugar in ways that keep your blood sugar in that we called euglycemic, not too high, not too low mode, is one reason why ingesting Mate is attractive to me. If you go to South America, well, you'll see especially among Oregonians, but also Argentines, is people actually carry a thermos of this stuff with them around and bring it to meals in restaurants. And it's just considered cultural convention, it's not unusual to see that. So we don't see that so much here in the States but I happen to really love this stuff. I brew my own, because that's the most economical way to do it. And I really enjoy it. It can be a little bitter for some people. The real key there if you want to know, the Mate trick is to not use water that's really boiling hot. You go just shy of boil and then it doesn't have that same kind of tobacco like or really acidic flavor to it. It's just a little bit sweeter, although not quite sweet. So, Yerba Meta GLP1, can manage in healthy ways leptin levels, glucose levels, and glucagon levels in ways that if it serves you, that you might want to try. So once again, we covered an enormous amount of material, focused on how hormones regulate feeding, hunger, and when one feels they don't need to eat, so-called satiety, that you've had enough. As always, we covered a lot, but I could not be exhaustive about all the information related to this topic. It's just so vast. For instance, we did not talk about thyroid hormone, an extremely important hormone and pathway in the body and brain. We are going to do an episode related to thyroid and tools to regulate thyroid, I promise. Having seen this episode, you will be able to digest that material with far more ease. We also didn't talk about the fact that testosterone and estrogen can impact blood glucose in ways that are opposite to one another. That when estrogen levels are high, appetite tends to be reduced. When testosterone levels are high, appetite tends to increase. So there are all sorts of interesting interplays between the various hormones. But that's too much of a deep dive of now. Right now, we've just focused today mainly on things like ghrelin, on things like, Melanocyte simulating hormone, incredible powerful hormone that can suppress appetite. On things like Cholecystokinin that comes from the gut and can suppress appetite. On things like food emulsifiers. On the fact that when you're eating you are amino acids seeking, even though you might not realize it. That you are also seeking out particular fatty acids in particular, the conjugated linoleic acids and Omega-3's. So I've tried to give you a number of actionable tools. Many of them behavioral. Some of them are based on supplements or even prescription drugs. Again, always do what's best for your health, and do that in company with a healthcare professional. I'm not a physician, I don't prescribe anything. I'm a professor, I profess a lot of things. And I try and share with you what I think to be the best high quality peer reviewed literature. So that's what I've done today. Really appreciate your time and intention. Many of you have continued to ask how you can help support the podcast. And we really appreciate the question. There's several ways to do that. The first is to like a video that you've seen if you like it, and please subscribe to the YouTube channel. That's perhaps the most important thing about the YouTube channel. As well, leave us a comment. If you leave us a comment in the comment section that helps us. And please ask questions. Those questions and your comments do inform content of future episodes. We read them all. Except the negative ones we don't read, I'm just kidding, we read them all. In addition, please subscribe on Apple and/or Spotify or both if you like. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review if you feel we deserve that. Apple also lets you leave a comment, some feedback for us as well. Please do check out our sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning of the podcast. That's the best way perhaps to support the podcast. As well we have a Patreon account. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support the podcast at any level you like. And today, as well as in previous episodes, I've mentioned various supplements. If you're interested in seeing what supplements I take and you want to explore for some other supplements as well, you can go to Thorne T-H-O-R-N-E.com slash U, the letter U, slash Huberman. Thorne is a supplement company that we believe to have the highest stringency in terms of what they put in the various supplements that they make. And the amounts that they put are very accurate. They've partnered with the Mayo Clinic. They partnered with all the major sports teams. And we've partnered with them because we believe in their levels of stringency and accuracy. If you go to thorne.com/u/huberman, you can see what I take and you'll also get 20% off any of those supplements or any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. So that's where you can find out more about supplements and the ones that I take. And again, you get the 20% discount on any supplements that Thorne makes. And last but not least, thank you for being with us. I hope you learned a lot. I hope you explore some of the tools and that the mechanistic information that you learned today will serve you well. If you know anyone that's interested in this topic or you think that someone could benefit from it, please suggest the podcast to them as well. And most of all, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 332 ---
Video ID: qJXKhu5UZwk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qJXKhu5UZwk
Title: The Science of How to Optimize Testosterone & Estrogen
Published: 2021-04-12 12:00:13 UTC
Description:
This episode I discuss the hormones testosterone and estrogen and how they impact the brain, body, and behavior at ages after puberty. I also discuss how various behaviors such as exercise (resistance and endurance training) and sex, or observing sex impact these hormones and their levels. I ask: "what specifically is it about such activities that impact testosterone and estrogen?"; the resounding theme is that when our nervous system is activated in particular ways it drives our endocrine system and vascular system to activate or repress certain hormone networks in predictable ways. I also discuss peer-reviewed studies and protocols addressing (at a mechanistic level) how light, cold and heat, and respiration (breathing) can positively or negatively impact testosterone and estrogen. And we discuss specific supplements and compounds that peer-reviewed studies illustrate can adjust testosterone and estrogen levels: by changing their binding to other proteins, by raising them directly, or by changing other hormones released from the brain and pituitary. I discuss optimization in the normal reference ranges for these hormones, and I discuss pheromones, apnea, menstrual cycles, menopause and andropause. As always a mix of basic science, biological mechanisms and tools and protocols are discussed.

**Note: Future episodes will focus on the science of prescription hormone replacement therapies, the science of hormone-based birth control and the role of testosterone, estrogen and other compounds in fertility, athletic performance and recovery.

#HubermanLab #Testosterone #Estrogen 

Thank you to our sponsors
Four Sigmatic - https://foursigmatic.com/huberman 
Blinkist - https://blinkist.com/huberman 
Theragun - https://theragun.com/huberman 

Bloodwork sponsor
InsideTracker - https://insidetracker.com/huberman 

Supplements from Thorne
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

References:
Examine: https://examine.com
“Behavioral Endocrinology” by Nelson and Kriegsfeld 5th Ed.

Timestamps
00:00:00 Introduction 
00:05:50 Hormone Optimization  
00:07:00 Salutogenesis: A Powerful Way to Conceptualize Health 
00:10:03 Estrogen and Testosterone: Sources, Levels & Ratios  
00:15:46 The Power of Competition, Plus: Anxiety, Persistence & Dopamine
00:20:58 Testosterone & Libido Pre-Ovulation 
00:21:48 Estrogen & Sexual Receptivity; Libido In Males 
00:23:10 How Sex Behavior Impacts Testosterone: Observing vs. Actual vs. Abstinence 
00:26:46 Testosterone & Prolactin: Sex Seeking vs Pair Bonding 
00:27:30 DHEA (dehydroepiandrosterone): Effects on Levels/Ratios  
00:28:45 Behaviors That Decrease Testosterone (& Cortisol): Parenting & Prolactin 
00:31:24 How Illness Impacts Testosterone & Estrogen: Cytokines, e.g., IL-6 
00:33:20 How Exactly Do Behaviors Change Hormones?  
00:34:18 Pheromones: Miscarriage, Menstrual Cycles, Puberty Onset, & Mate Recognition 
00:43:33 Apnea: A Powerful Bi-Directional Influence On Estrogen & Testosterone 
00:47:44 Mouth vs. Nose Breathing & Hormone Levels: Effects Via Sleep and Direct Effects 
00:51:11 How Sleep Adjusts Cortisol/Testosterone and Cortisol/Estrogen Ratios 
00:53:49 02:CO2 Ratios, Nasal Breathing During Exercise 
00:56:30 Light Viewing Patterns & Hormones: Dopamine, GnRH 
00:57:44 Spring Fever: Tyrosinase, Hair Color, Mating Frequency 
01:04:39 Specificity of Hormone Effects 
01:06:03 Temperature: Cold & Hot Gonads 
01:14:10 How To Exercise: Types, Effort Level, Sequencing 
01:21:42 Cardio/Endurance vs. Resistance Training (First or Last?) Yes, It Matters 
01:24:41 Estrogen & Menopause: Compounds That May Ameliorate/Reverse Symptoms 
01:33:18 Nutrients That Optimize The Foundation For Hormones
01:36:00 Opioids as Severe Hormone Disruptors
01:37:23 Testes, Antlers & Ovaries
01:38:50 Creatine & Increasing DHT (Dihydrotestosterone) 
01:40:14 Free and Bound Testosterone: SHBG (Sex Hormone Binding Globulin), Tongat Ali 
01:43:23 Nettles, Prostate, Boron, & Blood Brain Barrier 
01:45:27 Hormone Related Cancers: Sometimes Reducing Estrogen and Testosterone Is Optimal 
01:47:43 Ecdysteroids: Mimic Mammalian Hormones 
01:51:50 Optimizing Brain Hormones: Chorionic Gonadatropin, Fadogia Agrestis  
01:57:18 Additional Compounds, Liver Toxicity, Overall Milieu  
01:59:17 Summary: And Note About Additional Related Topic Coverage Coming 

Disclaimer: https://hubermanlab.com/disclaimer/

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English (United States)
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford, it is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost-to-consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. Before we begin today, just want to acknowledge that if you're watching this on YouTube, yes, I have a bandage on the left side of my face, I was trying to cook something for Costello and I and I got burned, burned myself, it was a cooking accident. I'm fine, no need to dwell on it, we can move on, but I just wanted to let you know everybody's going to be okay, he got a great meal, I got a burn and a great meal. Today's episode is brought to us by Four Sigmatic. Four Sigmatic is a wellness company that makes mushroom coffee. For those of you that haven't heard of mushroom coffee before, I just want to make clear, these are not psychedelic mushrooms, and no, the coffee does not taste like mushrooms at all. It tastes amazing and it tastes like coffee. I started using Four Sigmatic coffee a few years ago and then we actually stocked it in my lab, we still stock it in my lab because it tastes really good and it also happens to have two types of mushrooms in it that I particularly like because of their supplement and medicinal qualities, and those two are lion's mane mushroom, which has been shown in several research studies to have a mild anxiolytic, meaning anti-anxiety effect, and mood-elevating effect, those are from research studies done independently, as well, it has Chaga mushroom, Chaga mushroom has been shown to increase growth factors that impact the nervous system, like nerve growth factor, so that's the reason I drink it, and that's the reason we stock it in the lab, and that's the reason why I drink it at home. If you'd like to try Four Sigmatic, you can go to foursigmatic.com/huberman, that's F-O-U-R-S-I-G-M-A-T-I-C, .com/huberman, and you'll get up to 40% off your order plus free shipping on their mushroom coffees, that's foursigmatic.com/huberman for up to 40% off and free shipping. Today's episode is also brought to us by Blinkist. Blinkist is an app that has thousands of nonfiction books condensed down to just 15 minutes of key takeaways that you can read or listen to. For me, I really like listening to books on Blinkist, even books that I've already read. Typically, the way I consume information is, unless it's fiction, I'll listen to a nonfiction book or I'll read the actual, physical hard copy of a nonfiction book, and then at the end, I like to take some notes about things that really stuck with me or key takeaways that I'd like to teach or share with other people. With Blinkist, it allows me to go back to those books and get all the essential items, some of which I might have missed in the course of listening to or reading the full-length version, and if I haven't read a book before, it also gives me a sense of whether or not I'd like to read the book. Blinkist has some terrific science category books, for example, my colleague and friend David Eagleman's book, "Livewired," which came out recently, is all about neuroplasticity, it's a fantastic book, I read the full-length book, and I've listened to it on Blinkist, and it's a terrific synopsis of "Livewired," that's in there. David Sinclair's book, "Lifespan," many of you probably know that David Sinclair, professor of genetics at Harvard Medical School, is a real pioneer in the aging and longevity field, his book "Lifespan" is terrific, I've read the full-length book, I've listened to it, and I've listened to it on Blinkist, and so it really captures a lot of the essential elements that you would want to get from that book. Blinkist is also just a great way to get through many books on the bookshelf that you've been meaning to get to but you haven't had time. With Blinkist, you can get unlimited access to read or listen to a massive library of books, not just science books, and they're all condensed in this way of just 15 minutes will allow you to get all the key information, so right now, for a limited time, Blinkist has a special offer just for "Huberman Lab Podcast" audiences, you go to blinkist.com/huberman and you can try Blinkist free for seven days and save 25% off your new subscription, that's Blinkist, B-L-I-N-K-I-S-T, .com/huberman to start your free seven-day trial, and you'll get 25% off, but only when you sign up at blinkist.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Theragun. Theragun is a handheld percussive therapy device that releases deep muscle tension. I was introduced to Theragun on a dive expedition for my laboratory a few years ago. On that expedition, we were working very hard, we were diving all day, we were carrying pelican cases with equipment, we were carrying tanks, very sore, very tired by the end of the day, as was everybody else. Someone brought along a Theragun, and pretty soon, that thing was getting passed around and became the most coveted device on board because it really works to relieve the soreness and deep muscle tension that accumulates with physical work, exercise, even just sitting too long throughout the day, so when I got back, I got a Theragun, I still use the Theragun daily, it's terrific because it's very quiet so you can use it while watching a movie or even while having a conversation without it feeling intrusive, it really gets down into the meat of the muscle if you want, or you can use it more superficially if you like. If you want to try Theragun, you can go to theragun.com/huberman, they have several models available, the first one starts at $190, which if you think about it, is comparable to the price of a professional massage except that unlike a professional massage, you can use the Theragun for as long as you want throughout the day and for as many days as you like, that's theragun.com/huberman, and I should mention that there's also a 30-day money-back guarantee, so if you don't like the product, you send it back, you get your money back. This month on the "Huberman Lab Podcast," we're talking all about hormones, these incredible chemicals that can impact our mood, our behavior, our feelings of optimism or pessimism. The amazing thing about hormones is that hormones impact all those things, but all those things, how we feel and what we do and what we think also can impact our hormones, and so it's a really fascinating area of biology that impacts every single one of us every day both in wakefulness and in sleep and throughout the lifespan. Today, we're going to be talking about hormone optimization, and we're mainly going to be focusing on estrogen and testosterone and their derivatives. Last episode of the "Huberman Lab Podcast," we talked about sexual development, that is, how the chromosomes, the gonads, and hormones impact what we call sexual development, leading all the way up to puberty. Today, we're mainly going to talk about processes that happen from puberty onward, although we might talk a little bit about development as well, so today, we're going to talk a lot about basic biology, but we're going to weave in a lot of practical tools along the way for how to optimize these incredibly powerful things that we call hormones. Before we dive into our discussion about hormone optimization, I want to raise what I think is a very important point that at least I hadn't heard of until recently, which is the concept of salutogenesis. Many of us are familiar with the concept of pathogenesis, the idea that there are all these scary diseases like dementia and heart disease and stroke, and all these things that await us if we don't take good care of ourselves and that might await us even if we do, that's the pathogenic model, salutogenesis is something I learned about from one of my Stanford Medicine colleagues, which is a different orientation toward health and well-being where you're taking on particular behaviors, you're taking on a particular stance towards nutrition and exercise, supplementation, et cetera, in order to promote well-being above where you would be if you were not doing those behaviors. Now, if you think about it, these two things, salutogenesis and the pathogenic model, are really two sides of the same coin, but I'll just give an example of how this might affect you in a real way. If you like exercise because it feels good, great, but many people exercise, or eat well, for that matter, in order to avoid heart disease or to avoid dementia, to avoid negative changes in body composition, and while that's powerful and certainly is the case that exercise will help you move away from all those things, the salutogenesis model differs in that it involves a mindset and an orientation towards doing those things in order to feels good, in order to enhance your level of energy, in order to improve endocrine function and metabolic function, so it's really part of the pathogenic model, and yet, salutogenesis is really more of a mindset toward why you would do these particular behaviors, and really, the most powerful mindset is going to be one where you are thinking about the pathogenic model, doing things so that you don't end up sick, et cetera, and to move away from sickness, as well as the salutogenic model where you're doing things in order to move towards health and well-being. We think of health and wellness nowadays, or the wellness community or wellness practices, and in many ways, that is the essence of the salutogenic model, but I found it very interesting to know that within the field of allopathic medicine, these two models exist but we don't hear about the salutogenic model quite as often, so it's just something to keep in mind, especially because of some of the mindset effects that were discussed in previous episodes, I'm not going to go into these in detail again right now, but if you might recall from the episode on food and mood, we talked about some of these incredible studies that were done by Alia Crum's group at Stanford and others showing that if you tell people that the behavior that they're about to do, in this case, it was people cleaning up hotel rooms because that was their job, if you tell them that it's good for them, then you see much greater positive health effects than if they aren't aware of that information that it's good for them, so we should really be thinking about not just moving away from disease and negative things, but also why certain things are good for us because it's well-established now from really good scientific studies that keeping in mind the positive effects of things can really have an outsized effect on well-being, right down to the level of our physiology. So let's talk about hormone optimization, today we're going to talk about hormone optimization in reference to estrogen and testosterone and their derivatives, now, estrogen and testosterone and their derivatives are what we call sex steroids, now, the sex steroids immediately call to mind sex, for obvious reasons, and steroids, meaning anabolic steroids, but I just want to emphasize that estrogen and testosterone are present in everybody, it's their ratios that determine their effects, and so today we're going to talk about how you can optimize their ratios depending on your particular life goals because the ratio of estrogen and testosterone in every individual has profound influence on feelings of well-being, feelings of optimism, feelings of anxiety or lack of anxiety, on reproduction, on sexual behavior independent of reproduction, they are profoundly powerful molecules, and we all make these molecules, to some degree or another, but there are also important behavioral tools, supplementation tools, as well as prescription drugs that can impact the ratios of testosterone and estrogen in really powerful ways, so we're going to cover all of that. I want to emphasize that when you hear sex steroids or steroid hormones, most people think about anabolic steroids, and of course, anabolic steroids are derivatives of testosterone or testosterone itself, and they are heavily used and abused in the sports community as well as outside the sports community, but there, of course, are many steroids that are not anabolic steroids that are also abused in sports. Today, we're not talking about drugs in sports, but I think that it carries such a heavy weight when people hear the word steroids, they think about anabolic steroids, so while today's discussion will certainly be relevant to physical performance, in fact, we're going to talk about how specific types of exercise, particular patterns of cold exposure, as well as particular patterns, believe it or not, of breathing can impact sex steroid hormones, both estrogen and testosterone, the discussion isn't really geared towards performance enhancement in sport, although we will do an entire episode, perhaps even an entire month related to performance enhancement in physical enterprises. So one of the first things to understand if you want to optimize your hormones is where they come from. There are a lot of different glands in the body that produce hormones, there's the pineal gland, some hormones are made in the hypothalamus, hormones are made by the gonads, the ovaries or the testes, you've got the thyroid gland, there are a bunch of different glands that make these different hormones, but when we're talking about the sex steroid hormones, estrogen and testosterone, the major sources are ovaries for estrogen and the testes for testosterone, although the adrenals can also make testosterone. Now, there are also some enzymes, enzymes are things that can change chemical composition, and the enzymes that we're going to talk about today are the aromatases mainly, the aromatases convert testosterone into estrogen, so in a male, for instance, that has very high testosterone, some of that is going to be converted into estrogen by aromatase, and aromatase is made by body fat, it's also made in the testes themselves, a lot of people don't realize this, but the testes actually have the capacity to manufacture estrogen and aromatase, albeit at low levels, but this turns out to be important for optimizing hormone levels in males at later points, and we'll discuss that. It's important to note that there's a huge range in terms of the levels of hormones, testosterone and estrogen, between individuals, and it actually occurs within individuals across the lifespan, I'm not going to throw out specific numbers of X picograms per deciliter, et cetera today because that's going to vary a lot, it's going to depend on whether or not you're measuring in picograms or nanograms and that sort of thing, if you want to examine your hormones, you should do that in conjunction with a medical doctor, ideally, an endocrinologist can help you sort out that information, but the important thing to know is that prepubescent females make very little estrogen, and when we talk about estrogen, we mainly talk about estradiol, which is the most active form of estrogen in both males and females. So prepubescent females, very low levels of estrogen, during puberty, levels of estrogen, AKA estradiol, basically skyrocket, and then across the lifespan, estrogen is going to vary depending on the stage of the menstrual cycle, but as one heads into menopause, which typically takes place nowadays somewhere between age 45 and 60, levels of estrogen are going to drop and then post-menopause levels of estrogen are very low. As well, testosterone will fluctuate across the lifespan, testosterone is going to be relatively low prepuberty in males, during puberty, it's going to skyrocket, and then the current numbers are that it drops off at about a rate of 1% per year, although we're going to talk about some data that show that there's actually tremendous variation in testosterone levels, there's actually a lot of examples of men in their 90s, their 90s, who still have testosterone levels that mimic pubertal levels, which is remarkable and speaks to the huge variation in testosterone levels across individuals. So let's talk about other sources of these hormones, and then it will make clear what avenues you might want to take in order to optimize these hormones. The other glands and tissues in the body that make these hormones, testosterone and estrogen, as I mentioned briefly, are the adrenals, so the adrenals right on top of the kidneys, and the release of these steroid hormones from the adrenals, in particular testosterone and some of its related derivatives, are mainly activated by competition, so let's talk about competition because it turns out that competition is a powerful influence on the sex steroid hormones, and the sex steroid hormones powerfully influence competition. So most people don't realize this, but most males of a given mammalian species never get to reproduce, in fact, they never even get to have sex at all, and we don't often think about that, but testosterone plays a powerful role in determining which members of a given species will get to reproduce, which ones of that species will actually get access to females, and so here I'm not talking about humans specifically, but it's well known in species like elephant seals, in species like antlered animals and rams, for instance, that the higher levels of testosterone correlate with access to females. Now, one interpretation of this is that the females are detecting which males have high testosterone and selecting them, they're more receptive to them, we're going to talk about receptivity for mating in a moment, but it's actually more so that the males that have higher testosterone forage further and will fight harder for the females, and this is really interesting because there's very good evidence now that testosterone can reduce anxiety, promote novelty-seeking, and promote competitive interactions, and so before you leap too far with this in your mind and think about all these human behaviors, just stay with me because there's a little bit of biology here that makes it all make sense and it turns out to be pretty simple. We have a brain region called the amygdala, in Latin, that just means almond, but the amygdala is most famous for its role in fear, we hear a lot about fear and the amygdala, but that the amygdala is really involved in threat detection, it sets our thresholds for anxiety and what we consider scary or too much, testosterone secreted from the gonads and elsewhere in the body binds to the amygdala and changes the threshold for stress, so I've said before on previous versions of this podcast and on other podcasts that testosterone has this incredible effect of making effort feel good, but what I was really referring to is the fact that testosterone lowers stress and anxiety, in particular, in males in a given species. Now, this is important because we often think of testosterone as creating, whatever, masculinization or it's, you know, virilization, or all these terms are thrown around, but what's it really doing when it comes to mate choice and competition? What it's doing is it's reducing the threshold for anxiety, and in doing so, it selects individuals of a given species to push further, being willing to suffer more, although it also reduces pain, so maybe they also suffer less, in pursuit of reproduction and females. Now, it's well known in humans that both males and females who have elevated levels of testosterone will engage in more novelty-seeking, and I do want to point out that even individuals without testes have testosterone, and peaks in testosterone have similar effects regardless of whether or not someone has ovaries or testes, testosterone increases generally lead to more foraging, more novelty-seeking, increases in libido, and increases in desire to mate, so it is the case that increases in testosterone promote competitive and foraging-type behaviors in humans and in nonhuman mammals, but it's also true that competition itself can increase androgens, such as testosterone, I want to repeat that, competitive environments themselves can increase testosterone. Now, some people have come to the conclusion that if you win, your testosterone goes up, and if you lose, your testosterone goes down, and to some extent, that's true, but that's not a direct effect on the gonads, that's actually mediated by the neuromodulator dopamine, we talked about dopamine in the episode on motivation and drive, and dopamine and testosterone have a remarkable interplay in the body, dopamine is actually released in the brain in ways that has the pituitary, this gland that sits over the roof of your mouth, release certain hormones that then go on to promote the release of more testosterone, and indeed, winning promotes more dopamine, and later, more testosterone, however, in the short term, just competing increases testosterone independent of whether or not you win or lose, so the short version of this is that competition increases testosterone, and this may be an ancient mechanism whereby the androgens, such as testosterone, are feeding back to encourage more competitive-type behaviors because every species, whether or not you're talking about reproduction or other resource allocation, is involved in competition, not every individual of a species gets access to the same number of mates or the same quality of mates, and this is true in both directions, for males and females and everything in between. So I just want to emphasize once more in case I went through it too quickly that increases in testosterone in females are also going to lead to increase in reproductive behavior or seeking out reproductive behavior, they increase libido, in fact, there's a particular phase of the menstrual cycle where testosterone peaks just before ovulation that, on average, leads female humans to seek out sex more than they would otherwise during their cycle, and this is all by self-report, but this is also while measuring things like testosterone-estrogen ratios, and so forth, so it's really interesting that a single molecule, regardless of chromosomal or gonadal background, is increasing seeking of mates across individuals, increasing desire to compete or willingness to compete, and lowering the threshold for stress and anxiety. It's important to point out that while increases in testosterone promote seeking of mates and reproduction in both males and females, in females, it's actually increases in estrogen that promote receptivity to mating, so testosterone is driving the seeking of sex and estrogen is promoting the actual act of sex from females, so-called receptivity, consensual receptivity. In males, it's interesting to point out that testosterone is promoting seeking of sex, but it's also estrogen in males that's important for libido, if estrogen levels are brought too low, then men will completely lose their libido, this is often not discussed or overlooked in the discussion about testosterone therapy and performance-enhancing drugs, people think that hyperandrogenized individuals, meaning people that have very high levels of androgen will have very high levels of libido, and they will, provided estrogen is available in sufficient ratios to match that testosterone, so it's not simply the case that high levels of testosterone produce a lot of sex and mating behavior and low levels of estrogen are good across the board, you actually need both in both males and females, it's just that in females, the testosterone levels are always going to be lower than the estrogen levels, and in males, the estrogen levels are always going to be lower than testosterone levels, so testosterone promotes sex-seeking behavior, and the real question then is, does sex itself promote testosterone? And the answer is somewhat complicated, but the short version is yes, and as you recall, sex has multiple stages, so there's the physical act of sex, there's the seeking of sex, and then there's orgasm and ejaculation. Now, it's important to distinguish between these because whether or not sex itself increases testosterone depends on whether or not the male ejaculates, and this is very important to understand because on a previous episode, I mentioned how dopamine increases with sexual activity, remember, dopamine and testosterone tend to increase linearly with one another, but then after ejaculation, there's a release of prolactin, and prolactin actually sets the refractory period in males during which he can't have sex again, and the duration of the refractory period will vary tremendously depending on how much and how long that prolactin release occurs. I also described in a previous episode how some people take vitamin B6, I'm not suggesting anyone do this, but take vitamin B6 in order to reduce prolactin levels and thereby reduce the duration of the refractory period, but getting at this question about testosterone and sexual behavior, it's important to distinguish between these different phases of reproduction or reproductive behaviors, so there are studies showing that sexual behavior itself can increase testosterone, there was a study published in 2011 from Escasa et al., E-S-C-A-S-A, this is the stuff of textbooks, this is on PubMed, these are quality studies, showing that men who observe sex, so I guess this would be observing pornography, will have slight increases in testosterone during the observation, these people actually were willing to have blood draws taken while watching pornography, they had increases in testosterone that were very modest, of about 10%, whereas when people participated in sex, so they actually did this study where people had blood draws and they had real sex with their partners, and they had 70% increases in testosterone, so there are increases in testosterone that are quite significant during the physical act of sex and far less so during observing sex. Now, the question that I often get, in fact, it's one of the questions I get most often in the comments on YouTube, I don't know why that is, is whether or not ejaculation adjusts testosterone levels, and it turns out, there are two studies that I could find that were quality studies on PubMed that address this, that sex and ejaculation itself does not reduce testosterone levels although it will increase prolactin levels for the reasons I described a moment ago, however, abstinence or sex without ejaculation for a week or more will increase testosterone levels up to 400%, so the answer is actually complicated, it's not straightforward, what it means is that sex itself increases testosterone, however, abstinence also increases testosterone even further, so it's a nuanced answer, and I hope this is satisfactory, no pun intended, to those of you that have been asking me, what is the relationship between sex and ejaculation and testosterone and dopamine? It is nuanced, and you have to understand that nuance if you want to understand how certain behaviors impact hormones and how hormones impact those behaviors. As I mentioned before, in females, testosterone also primes the motivation to seek out sex, and sex itself also increases testosterone, but it also increases prolactin, so in both men and women, sex increases prolactin post-sex, it's just the way that the system works, it's that testosterone and dopamine increase in the seeking-out and the behavior of sex, and then after sex, prolactin levels go up, there's kind of a quiescence, the whole nervous system is promoted towards calm, and this may actually have something to do with pair-bonding and the encouragement of individuals to spend more time together to exchange different smells and hormones, and maybe even pheromones, and we're going to talk about pheromones in a moment. A few years ago, there was a lot of excitement about the hormone DHEA, which is mainly made by the adrenals, DHEA has been promoted as kind of a catch-all for increasing testosterone and estrogen in males and females, and indeed, DHEA will increase both testosterone and estrogen, this is something to be mindful of if you're thinking about taking DHEA or you're taking DHEA already. DHEA will increase both testosterone and estrogen, and the extent to which it increases one or the other will depend on whether or not you're starting off with more estrogen than testosterone or whether or not you're starting off with more testosterone than estrogen and whether or not you have a lot of aromatase, so for individuals that have a lot of aromatase being made by the testes or by body fat, if you take DHEA, there's a good chance that a fair portion of that is going to be shuttled towards estrogen production and not towards testosterone production, whereas in individuals that have low levels of testosterone to begin with, high levels of estrogen, there's a good chance that the DHEA is going to promote mainly estrogen production, at least that's what I could find from the research studies that I examined. So the way to think about DHEA, it's a kind of global promoter of the sex steroid hormones, and its specific effects are going to depend a little bit on where you started and whether or not you have ovaries or testes. So just as there are behaviors that can increase testosterone, there are behaviors that can decrease testosterone, and one of the most well-characterized ones in humans is becoming a parent. So expecting fathers have an almost 50% decrease in testosterone levels, both free and bound testosterone, as well, their cortisol levels, a stress hormone, drop by almost three-fold, which is incredible, and their estradiol levels double, so their estrogen levels double, so expecting fathers many people have known put on additional body weight, everyone always thought that it's because they're eating in parallel with their pregnant wife, but it turns out that these effects of reduced testosterone, increased estradiol, and reduced cortisol can all be explained by an increase in prolactin, so not just in humans, but in other species as well, when the male and female of that species are expecting young, they lay down more body fat, the assumption is that this is to prepare for long nights of no sleep, which occurs in many species, not just in humans, so it's really interesting that this hormone, prolactin, can start suppressing whole categories of hormones, sex steroid hormones, and can start increasing whole categories of other ones, so we hear about the dad bod, there are a lot of explanations for the dad bod that extend well beyond this podcast episode, but it is a well-known phenomenon that testosterone is going to drop, prolactin's going to increase, estradiol's going to increase in males and females that are expecting children. Now, how long that lasts is very interesting, it actually has to do with how much contact and how much contact with smells of the baby, of the offspring, the father happens to have, so how available or unavailable he is will actually impact his level of hormones, now, I'm definitely not promoting the idea that fathers or mothers take time away from their offspring in order to keep their testosterone levels high or to restore them, that's not what I'm saying at all, it's just interesting to point out that these evolutionary mechanisms push us toward or bias us toward particular categories of behaviors by influencing our hormones, which then feed back and promote more of that particular behavior because as I mentioned before, peaks in testosterone in males and females cause individuals to seek sex, not promote parenting, whereas reductions in testosterone, increases in prolactin, and decreases in cortisol move individuals of both sexes toward parenting behavior and less toward reproductive behavior. The other behavior that markedly reduces testosterone in both males and females and markedly reduces the desire for seeking sex and sex itself is illness, and many of you might say, "Well, duh, when people feel sick, "they don't feel like seeking out mates, "they don't feel like having sex," but have you ever wondered why that actually is? Well, it turns out that it can be explained by the release of what are called inflammatory cytokines, so cytokines are related to the immune system, they travel in the lymph and in the blood, and they attack invader cells like bacteria and viruses, and under conditions of illness, we make a lot of different cytokines, some of them are anti-inflammatory, but some of them are pro-inflammatory, and the best-known example of a pro-inflammatory cytokine is IL-6, and it's known that IL-6, when injected into individuals, will decrease the desire for sex and eventually will reduce levels of testosterone and estrogen independent of feeling lousy, so the reason why people don't want sex when they're sick is because levels of IL-6 are increased. Now, this is important because as we start to think about the different ways to modulate the sex steroid hormones, so-called optimize the hormones, keeping levels of IL-6 low is going to be important for them to exert their effects, now, IL-6 doesn't just travel to the gonads and shut down the gonads, it actually has ways to interact with some of the receptors that the steroid hormones, estrogen and testosterone, bind to, and impact those receptors so that the sex steroid hormones can't have their effect. In short and put simply, inflammatory cytokines like IL-6 are bad for sex steroid hormones, and so we're going to talk about how to modulate IL-6 in the direction that you would want and how to increase another cytokine called IL-10, which is anti-inflammatory in ways that can help promote, or at least support, the sex steroid hormones. So as we move forward, we're going to now start to consider what sorts of behavioral practices, as well as other things, can modulate the sex steroid hormones in the directions that you want them to go, but before we do that, and in order to set the stage for that, you should be asking yourself, how is it, or why is it, at a mechanistic level, that behaviors can modulate hormones at all? If you think about it, it's kind of strange that just the mere act of being a parent or parenting can change testosterone levels so dramatically or estradiol levels so dramatically, what is it? Is it the sweat of the baby? Is it their saliva? Is it the sight of the baby? Is it holding the baby, or is it all those things? It turns out that many of those effects are because of smell, or in some cases, even possibly pheromones. Now, I talked about hormones, hormones, again, are a chemical, travels in the body, impacts tissues and cells elsewhere in the body, a pheromone is a chemical that's released by one member of a species that goes and impacts members elsewhere, but of the same species, or even of other species. Now, pheromone effects are absolutely well-established in lots of animal species, but they are very controversial in humans. Today, I'm going to talk about some of the well-established ones in animals, I've mentioned one or two of these before on previous podcasts, but I haven't mentioned several of them, and I'm going to talk about the evidence for pheromones in humans that are well-established. So the main ones in animals that are discussed are called the Lee-Boot effect, the Whitten effect, the Bruce effect, and the Vandenbergh effect, named after the people that discovered them. The Lee-Boot effect is when you house females of a given species together with no males, they start displaying longer, what are called estrus cycles, in many species, they don't have menstrual cycles, which are 28 days, they have estrus cycles which tend to be four days or some variant thereof. It's an interesting phenomenon because what it means is that the presence of the male itself is changing the ovulation cycle. Now, many people out there, I imagine mostly the people that are ovulating out there will say, "Of course, I notice I ovulate differently, "or my cycle changes when I'm in the presence of my partner "or I'm not," but the pheromone effect that mirrors this Lee-Boot effect in humans has still not really been identified, nobody knows what the exact chemical is, but nonetheless, this is a strong effect in some animals. The other one is the Bruce effect, and this is a very dramatic effect whereby a pregnant animal will abort or reabsorb her fetus if the dad of those animals, the father that sired the litter, because these are animals, they're litters, is removed and a novel male is placed in her vicinity for about 48 hours, and what's interesting is the way that this happens is a pheromone that comes from male urine activates the gonadotropin-releasing hormone system and causes a reintroduction of the estrus cycle and a spontaneous abortion of the fetus. Now, a lot of people have taken the Bruce effect kind of to its extreme and asked whether or not in humans, miscarriages are caused by detecting the pheromones or odors of novel males, meaning the non-dad male, and that's still an open question, nobody knows if that's true or not, so I want to emphasize that. The other one is the Vandenbergh effect, and this is one I alluded to in a previous episode of the podcast, which is that puberty in females can be accelerated by placing a novel sexually competent male in with a young female who has not undergone puberty. There's also a version of this, which I haven't described, which is delay of puberty where you take juvenile female animals that have not undergone puberty and you put them with more mature females of the same species, and that introduction of more females will cause a delay, a significant delay in the onset of puberty. So these are all pheromone effects, and we know they're pheromone effects because they're not conscious, they also don't require actual contact with the other members of a given species, these are all effects that can be mediated by the urine from a given species or by the sweat of a given species, and speaking of sweat, the one pheromone effect that I'm very aware of from the published literature is a paper that was published in 1998 by Stern and McClintock which was getting at this question of synchronization of menstrual cycles. Now, the whole idea of synchronization of menstrual cycles is pretty controversial, for a long time, people said, "Oh, this is absolutely a well-characterized phenomenon," people in dormitories, their menstrual cycles would synchronize, people living in environments together, their menstrual cycles would synchronize, and then some studies came out that kind of undercut those data and said no, this actually doesn't happen, and it was kind of controversial, but there is a very clear effect that was described by Stern and McClintock, what they did actually was they took females, they charted their cycles, and then they had other females wear pads in their armpits and they collected sweat from those females, and then they took the sweat from those pads in those female's armpits, and they introduced them to women who had never had contact with the people who had sweated, they only had contact with their sweat, in fact, they swabbed it underneath their nose, and if that sounds gross, they dilute it in alcohol, so much so that they can't actually detect the odor of the sweat, that's actually very important because it's not the smell, it's the pheromone chemical itself, and it turns out the pheromone chemical itself can modulate the menstrual cycle, although it doesn't necessarily synchronize it with the sweater, what it does is it changes the duration and the pattern of ovulation relative to the so-called follicular phase, long and short of this is that the sweat and pheromones of females can modulate the menstrual cycle patterns of other adult females, it's just a question of whether or not they synchronize, and if you're kind of rolling your eyes now and saying, "Well, of course they do, "and this is really detailed," this is how the science is done, and the reason why people are so skeptical about the presence of pheromone effects in humans is that there's no well-identified pheromone organ, you know, we have an area of our nose that's responsible for smelling, that's well-established, it's been observed in MRIs many, many times, in cadavers many, many times, in pretty much all individuals, but the vomeronasal organ, which is the pheromone-detecting organ, hasn't really been found in humans, there's something called Jacobson's organ, which is thought to be the organ in the nose, it's actually on the top of the roof of the mouth and in the kind of back of the nose, this is for you wine tasters, I never can pronounce this, what are they called, sommelier, whatevers, the people that are excellent at drinking and detecting the essences of wine that you have to go through all these tests in order to get certified as one of them, somebody tell me, they are using probably a similar mechanism of mixing taste and smell, and Jacobson's organ, if it exists, the vomeronasal equivalent in humans, is thought to be a combination of smell and taste. Now, it gets even weirder and cooler when you think about a given study that was done in humans where if you take hundreds of t-shirts from boyfriends, keep them separate, you take those t-shirts, you wash them many times separately, and then you offer them to the girlfriends, the long-time partners of those guys, and what you'll find is that the girlfriend can pick out her boyfriend's t-shirt among hundreds of other t-shirts, not because it smells different, but because something about it seems different, it might smell different to her in some way that's kind of imperceptible even to her, and the level of accuracy in detecting that t-shirt, her partner's t-shirt, is way above statistical significant thresholds, so much so that you almost have to say there's something about these effects that are real pheromone effects, although people still argue that there are no pheromone effects in humans, that it's all through olfaction, I think these are interesting and important to understand because it means that a lot of things coming through our nose, whether or not it's pheromones or smells, are impacting hormones and our ability to attach memories and kind of recognition of mates and other people, including our children, not just our mates, and of course, perfume manufacturers have really picked up on the idea of pheromones and have entire laboratories set up to build chemical compounds into perfumes that are designed to attract other mates, this is a well-established and well-documented phenomenon. And the last point I'll make about pheromones is that this combination of taste and smell is such a real thing in the animal world that there's something called the flehmen response, during the mating seasons for different animals, you can actually even see this in horses, but for animals that are seasonal maters, they'll do something called the flehmen response where they actually open their lips and their mouth and they expose their gums so that they can capture pheromones that are floating in the wind in the environment, they actually are looking for mates using their mouth and kind of sniffing around. If you own a dog and you watch the way that the dog will sniff around selecting where they want to urinate, males and females, they're bringing molecules into their nose, I know it sounds kind of gross, sniffing urine, but there are a lot of pheromones in urine of animals, a lot of pheromones that are traveling in the wind, again, whether or not this is happening in humans, I don't know, but then you think about the perfume thing, and here people are putting these scents on themselves that contain putative pheromones, human pheromones, and walking around hoping that their scents are going to evoke mate-seeking behavior from other individuals of the same human species, so we are among the animals in this behavior, independent of whether or not you believe pheromone effects exist. So let's get back to behaviors that can help optimize hormone levels. One of the main behaviors that's been shown to be associated with poor levels of estrogen relative to age-match controls for people with ovaries or lower levels of testosterone compared to age-match controls for people with testes, is apnea, apnea has everything to do with under-breathing and the buildup of too much carbon dioxide in the body, there are other effects of apnea as well, but if there's a consistent literature in this whole story about aging and reductions in hormones and general health and reductions in hormones, it's apnea. I went deep into the literature on advanced menopause, or when menopausal symptoms are exacerbated, and I went into the literature on andropause, or early-onset andropause, or levels of testosterone that are far lower than they should be for a given age, and in every case, you could find multiple papers that show that apnea, or poor efficiency of breathing and buildup of too much carbon dioxide in the body was a problem, mostly sleep apnea, although apnea in general was shown to be an issue negatively impacting hormones. Now, the directionality of this effect isn't entirely clear, it could be that reductions in estrogen cause apnea, and actually, there's some reason to believe that might be the case, I found at least one paper showing that there are estrogen receptors on some of the neurons that actually innervate the lungs and allow for the perception of how full or empty the lungs are, in other words, reductions in estrogen may adjust breathing by changing our sensitivity to our own lungs, now, that was true for males and females, remember, estrogen is both males and females, but as well, I found papers in which testosterone reductions were associated with apnea, and testosterone receptors are also found on a lot of cells in the so-called viscera, including the lungs, so again, the directionality of the effect isn't clear, but what's really interesting is that there are very clear ways in which patterns of breathing, especially patterns of breathing in sleep, can modulate hormones in ways that are immediately actionable and can serve to optimize both estrogen and testosterone regardless of whether or not you have ovaries or testes. So what is apnea? Apnea is under-breathing, or mainly, cessation of breathing during sleep, so people are holding their breath, and then they'll suddenly wake up, and actually I've talked about the physiological sigh on previous episodes of this podcast, of this pattern of double inhales followed by exhales that one can do consciously to reduce stress and anxiety and offload carbon dioxide, that pattern of breathing is actually what kicks in spontaneously anytime we have an apnea episode in sleep, although in many people who have apnea, they don't engage the physiological sigh. People who are dramatically overweight also suffer a lot from apnea during sleep, there's actually a lot of buildup of carbon dioxide in the body, and that can lead to excessive sleepiness during the day, inability to access the deeper phases of sleep, and it's well-established that going into deep sleep and getting the proper patterns of slow-wave sleep and REM sleep are important for hormone optimization. I talked about how to modulate sleep and optimize sleep in the first month of the "Huberman Lab Podcast," so please check out those episodes if you have sleep issues or you want to work on your sleep, also check out Matt Walker's terrific book, "Why We Sleep," and that will help you find various protocols to help you optimize your sleep, but the issue of breathing itself can be adjusted in the daytime waking hours in ways that can powerfully impact both sleep, reduce incidents of sleep apnea, and apparently from some emerging literature, can also help to optimize various hormones even just by breathing in particular ways while awake. So here's how this works, there's now a lot of literature showing that breathing through the nose, not through the mouth, is powerful for improving lots of things, first of all, it improves cosmetic features of the jaw and face, this was first well-established by my colleagues at Stanford in a book called "Jaws: The Story of a Hidden Epidemic," this is by Sandra Kahn and Paul Ehrlich, who are both faculty at Stanford, has a forward by Robert Sapolsky, the great Robert Sapolsky, and it also has a heavy endorsement upfront by Jared Diamond, the author of "Guns, Germs, and Steel," the Pulitzer winner, so a lot of heavy hitters on this book, "Jaws." It's not a book that a lot of people know about, unfortunately, but it really describes the benefits of nasal breathing and the terrible things that happen when people, in particular children, but adults also, are heavy mouth-breathers, so mouth-breathers have changes in the cosmetics of their face and jaw that are really bad in terms of attractiveness, and this was done in twin studies, you can look in the book and see some of this, it's really dramatic how being a mouth-breather tends to make the chin drop back behind the upper mandible, there's a lengthening in the face, a drooping of the eyes, it can be quite dramatic or modest depending on how much mouth-breathing. Now, sometimes we have to breathe with our mouths, but there's also a lot of data and studies described in this book, "Jaws," that describe how nose-breathing in wakefulness and in sleep promotes all sorts of positive things related to not just cosmetics, but also the improvement of gas exchange of carbon dioxide and oxygen in the body, and as well, it can modify levels of different neurotransmitters and neuromodulators in ways that positively can impact hormones, so believe it or not, being a nasal-breather and avoiding being a mouth-breather can actually positively impact hormones, and in particular, the hormones testosterone and estrogen, although the way that it does that is by making you a better sleeper, which allows you to produce more testosterone and the appropriate amounts of testosterone and estrogen, but it does that in part through indirect mechanisms because deep sleep supports the gonads, the ovaries and the testicles and their turnover of cells and the production of cells, remember, in the ovary, particular cells and the egg follicles themselves make estrogen, and in the testicle, that the sertoli cells and the Leydig cells are important for the formation of sperm and for testosterone, respectively. So what does this all mean? This means we have to be breathing properly, it almost sounds kind of like, kind of new-agey, like, oh, you have to breathe properly to get your hormones right, but no, you have to breathe properly to get your breathing and sleep right so that your sleep can actually be deep enough and you're not entering apnea states, and then that will support gonad function, and I wouldn't be putting this out as one of the main behavioral tools upfront if it weren't for the fact that the effects of apnea on these hormones are dramatic and terrible, and the positive effects of getting breathing right on these hormones, testosterone and estrogen, are dramatic and wonderful, so let's talk about a few of those studies briefly so I can underscore the value of proper breathing in order to optimize hormones. So I was able to find at least four quality studies showing that when apnea is reduced in sleep, or eliminated, there are significant increases in testosterone in males and in proper estrogen to testosterone ratios in females, and the way that it works is very interesting, apparently, it works by reductions in cortisol, now, cortisol is a stress hormone that is released early in the day as we wake up and serves healthy roles in protecting us against infection, reducing inflammation, et cetera, but you don't want cortisol to be too high, and you certainly don't want it elevated too long throughout the day and night, and so we all know, because now we've been told a lot in the last decade or so, that getting proper sleep is important for all these aspects of health, getting proper sleep can really offset all the reductions in testosterone and estrogen and reductions in fertility that occur if we don't get enough sleep, but seldom is it discussed how sleep actually adjusts things like testosterone and estrogen, and it does it by modifying cortisol, so the molecule cholesterol can be converted into testosterone or estrogen, but there's a competition whereby the cholesterol will turn into cortisol and not testosterone, or it'll turn into cortisol and not estrogen if stress levels are too high, so the simple version of this is getting your breathing right during the waking hours, meaning primarily, unless you're working out really hard or there's some other reason why, you're maybe eating or speaking, that you need to be breathing through your mouth, you should be a nose-breather, there's really good evidence for that now, and in sleep, you also want to be a nose-breather because that's going to increase the amount of oxygen that you're bringing into your system and the amount of carbon dioxide that you're offloading, there are other positive effects of it as well, but you're basically reducing apnea, breath-holding in sleep leads to buildup of carbon dioxide and leads to increases in cortisol, which then decrease testosterone and decrease estrogen in negative ways across all sexes, okay? So the simple version of this is get your breathing right, so how do you do that, how do you get your breathing right? Well, for some people that have severe sleep apnea, they are going to need the CPAP machine, this is a machine that you actually put on your face and it helps you breathe properly in sleep. Many people, however, are starting to do this thing of taping their mouths shut, now, this sounds a little bit extreme, and you certainly don't want to do this in any way that's dangerous. James Nestor talked about this in his book, "Breath: The New Science of a Lost Art," that simply taping shut the mouth, with some tape that will allow you to open your mouth if you really need to, during sleep can allow people to shift over from being mouth-breathers and snorers to nose-breathers. In the daytime, the best way to get good at nasal-breathing is to dilate the nasal passages, 'cause a lot of people have a hard time breathing through their nose, and one way to do this is to just breathe through your nose more, and one way to do that is when you exercise, in particular, cardiovascular exercise, most of the time, provided you're not in maximum effort, you should be nasal-breathing. Now, for a lot of people, nasal-breathing during exercise is hard at first, but as you do it, because the sinuses have a capacity to dilate over time, you'll get better at it, the sinuses, if you haven't ever held a skull for, because of my job as a neuroscientist, I've held a lot of skulls, taken a lot of brains out of a lot of skulls, I teach neuroanatomy, and I've done that for, goodness, god knows how many species I've done that for, including human, but what the sinuses are is they're actually, what you've got are you got these little portals in the bone that run, you know, up here and down here, behind the nose and into the jaw, if you ever had a cold and your sinuses are stuffed up, you feel like you have congestion here and here and around your ears and in your cheeks and in your face, and that's because the sinuses are actually portals where the bones are fused together and interdigitated like this, but they're lined, of course, with mucus membranes, and as you start to nasal-breathe more, the nasal passages will start to dilate more, don't worry, you're not going to get giant nostrils, but what's going to end up happening is you're going to have an easier time breathing through your nose just from waking, so my advice would be breathe through your nose while exercising unless you're in maximum effort, pretty soon, what you'll find is you actually can create more output than you would if you were breathing through your mouth, and of course, there are exceptions to this, if you're swimming, follow that breath protocol, for fighters and martial artists, there's reason to do the kind of exhale breathing through the mouth, that shh kind of thing, you know, there are reasons to do that sort of thing for particular sports, but for most people who are kind of recreational athletes or exercisers, learn to be a nasal-breather, it has positive cosmetic effects, it reduces apnea, it offloads more carbon dioxide, it increases lung capacity, it dilates the sinuses, and it prevents apnea in sleep, so unless you have severe apnea and you need the CPAP, becoming a nasal-breather can have all sorts of positive effects by reducing cortisol, reducing apnea, and indirectly, raising testosterone and estrogen in the proper ratios, so this might seem kind of foundational and indirect, but when you go into the scientific literature, it comes through as one of the most powerful things that you can do that is zero cost, takes a little effort but it's zero cost, and it has all of these positive effects across the board, you know, both cosmetic and in sleep and hormonal, et cetera, so that's the first piece of behavioral advice. The second piece of behavioral advice relates to the viewing of light, and many of you have heard me talk about this before, and I'm not going to belabor the point that viewing bright light within the first hour of waking, whether or not it's from artificial light or ideally, from sunlight, has these powerful effects on sleep and wakefulness, but we have to return to this if you want to understand how light can impact hormones because hormones, light, and dopamine have a very close-knit relationship, so much so that your light-viewing behavior can actually have a direct effect on hormone levels and fertility, it can have a direct effect on hormone levels and libido, it can have a direct effect on hormone levels and your ability to heal quickly, and I'm not talking about shining light on particular injuries, that may or may not have positive effects, we can argue about that on a subsequent episode, it may, but what I'm talking about is viewing light with your eyes, so let's talk about that now because the scientific literature on this are robust and they extend back several decades, and yet, I think most people don't really understand how powerful this relationship is between light, dopamine, hormones, and all the great things that the sex steroid hormones do when they're available in your body in the proper ratios. In order to understand the powerful effects that light can have on the sex steroid hormones, we need to understand seasonal breeding animals, now, humans are not seasonal breeders, but if you understand the biology of how light impacts various neurotransmitters and hormones, you'll set yourself up for a deep understanding of what you should do with your light-viewing behavior. So several species of animals, many species of animals, in fact, like rabbits and fox, and various mustelids, like ferrets and ermines, change their pellage color across the seasons, this might be kind of a duh, but fox in winter are often white or light gray, and those same animals will be brown or darker-colored in the summertime and spring months. Now, those same animals breed in the spring, and they shut down breeding, they actually shut down ovulation, they often shut down testosterone production in the winter months, so right now I'm just correlating color of fur with tendency to breed, tendency to breed, as we know, is going to be related to the levels of sex steroid hormones, estrogen and testosterone. Now, why would these two things be linked? Well, it turns out that dopamine is the link between them, so dopamine has a precursor, that precursor is tyrosine, which is amino acid, comes from food, and when dopamine levels are high, as I mentioned before, there's a tendency for more gonadotropin-releasing hormone, luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, all the hormones that come from the hypothalamic-pituitary axis and stimulate estrogen and testosterone release from the ovary and testes, dopamine basically increases all of that. The precursor to dopamine is tyrosine, but the precursor to a lot of the melanin-producing elements of cells that give pigmentation, including for the hair, is tyrosine and tyrosinase, an enzyme, so yes, the same amino acid-based pathway, and many of the same enzymes that are devoted to dopamine and dopamine increasing the sex steroid hormones are devoted to giving pigmentation to the hair and skin, and this is why in the summer months, when days are longer, animals are breeding more, and this is also why in the winter months when days are shorter, animals are breeding less, this is also why in humans, many people, not all, feel an elevation in mood in the spring and summer months because of the amount of sunlight they're getting is increased relative to the winter months. Now, some of you may be saying, "I love the fall, I love the winter," sensitivity to light in these dopamine systems has a strong genetic component, so you go to some areas of the world, I have relatives who are Scandinavian, and in some areas of Scandinavia, people know that there's a kind of seasonal affective disorder, there's kind of a seasonal depression and people get sadder and more quiescent in the winter, there's actually less going out, and therefore, there's less sexual behavior, there's less partying and things of that sort, but other people will say, "No, during the winter months, I feel great "and I love the holidays around winter," et cetera, so there's a lot of variation, but in general, the pathway is the following, increased viewing of sunlight, and it has to be to the eyes, it's not to the skin, increased viewing of sunlight increases dopamine levels in the brain, increased dopamine levels in animals and humans increases the amount of these melanocytes and the activity of these melanin-producing cells, which give pigmentation to the skin and hair, and indirectly, increase the amount of testosterone and estrogen, and thereby, reproductive behavior, feelings of well-being, social interactions, reductions in anxiety, et cetera, all of which should make sense based on what we've talked about already in terms of the biology and the impact of these steroid hormones on various aspects of the mind and body. So how does this translate to a protocol? This translates to the protocol of, if you want to optimize testosterone and estrogen, you need to get your light-viewing behavior correct, it's not just about optimizing your sleep, which is also important, it's about getting sufficient amount of light in your eyes so you have sufficient levels of dopamine, so the simple protocols for that I've reviewed before, but it means getting anywhere from 2 to 10 minutes of bright light exposure in your eyes early in the day, it is not sufficient to do this with sunglasses unless you have to do that for safety reasons, it's fine to wear prescription lenses and contacts, if you can't get sunlight for whatever reason, you want to use bright artificial light, but that is absolutely critical for timing the cortisol release properly, limiting cortisol release to the early part of the day, getting increases in dopamine that are going to promote the production of testosterone and estrogen to healthy levels, the other aspect of light-viewing behavior that's extremely important is to avoid bright light exposure to your eyes in the middle of the night, if you're viewing bright light in the middle of the night, you are suppressing dopamine release, if you're suppressing dopamine release, you are suppressing testosterone levels so much so that I would wager that a major effect of sleep deprivation on reducing testosterone and estrogen is not necessarily because of the lack of sleep per se, it's because usually when people are not getting enough sleep, they're getting too much light in their eyes in the middle of the night as well, a study on this has not been completed yet, but there are two studies published in "Cell" and "Neuron," both Cell Press journals, excellent journals, showing that viewing bright light with the eyes in the middle of the circadian night has a detrimental effect on dopamine, and therefore has a detrimental effect on things like testosterone and estrogen, so you can't even begin to talk about supplements and other ways to optimize testosterone, diet and its effects on testosterone and estrogen and fertility and reproductive behavior, et cetera, until you get your breathing right, until you get things like your light-viewing behavior right, so bright light early in the day and throughout the day is great, view as much bright light, ideally sunlight, as you can, as much as you safely can, you obviously don't want to burn your retinas or damage your retinas, so never look at any light that's so bright it's painful to look at, but getting a lot of light in your eyes is not just about adjusting your sleep-wake rhythms, it's also about optimizing your sex steroid hormones, and avoiding bright light in the middle of the night is not just about not disrupting your sleep, it's also about optimizing the sex steroid hormones, and now that you understand a bit of how the sex steroid hormones work and how powerful they are for reducing anxiety and all these other effects, this should be straightforward to do, or hopefully it's inspired you to get your light-viewing behavior and your breathing behavior correct. In fact, in thinking about tools, for many people that are suffering from low levels of estrogen if they want higher levels or low levels of testosterone if they want higher levels, just getting the breathing and light-viewing behavior, which will indirectly support sleep behavior, can be a huge and positive effect on levels of sex steroid hormones. I can already anticipate that in hearing this, you might wonder whether or not viewing light is going to, for instance, increase your testosterone a lot when in fact you want your estrogen increased, or it's going to increase your estrogen a lot when you want your testosterone increased, everything I'm describing here is for people, regardless of chromosomal or gonadal background, so I'm trying to basically offer all this information in one swoop, but basically, if you're somebody who naturally has ovaries and has higher levels of estrogen than testosterone, then viewing bright light early in the day, because of dopamine's effects, is going to promote more estrogen and subtle increases in testosterone, whereas if you're somebody who starts off with more testosterone and lower estrogen, so somebody presumably who has testes or maybe you're supplementing with testosterone through other sources for whatever reason, bright-light viewing is going to increase testosterone and estrogen in parallel, but you're still going to maintain the ratio of testosterone to estrogen, in short, you don't have to worry that you're going to increase the wrong hormone, this is all about optimizing the ratios of hormones that you already have. Okay, so we've talked about breathing, we've talked about light, let's talk about a third element that there seems to be some excitement about lately for other reasons but that can actually have some pretty profound influences on hormone levels, and that's heat and cold, so as always, rather than just offer a tool, I'm going to tell you the underlying science as it relates to naturally occurring phenomena because, in understanding that and understanding the mechanism, you're going to be in a far better position to understand the tools and mechanisms and how you might want to adjust them for your own life. So now you understand the relationship between light, day length, dopamine, and hormone levels, and everyone should realize that temperature and day length are linked, and I'm sure as I say that, you're probably thinking, "Oh, of course." In summer, when there's more sunlight, days are longer, nights are shorter, in general, it tends to be warmer out, and in winter, when nights are longer, days are shorter, it tends to be colder out, and in the winter months, testosterone and estrogen tend to be lower in many animals and in humans, and in the summer months, because of the role of dopamine in promoting the sex steroid hormones, when days are longer and it's warmer, humans tend to make more estrogen and testosterone relative to the other months of the year. Now, these effects can be somewhat weak and modulated as opposed to in seasonally breeding animals where they're really dramatic, okay? But the point is that temperature and day length and sunlight, those are all intimately related because of the systems that we evolved in, right? So before we had artificial light and artificial heating and artificial cooling, our biology evolved under systems where temperature, day length, and the hormones were correlated with one another, so nowadays, there's a lot of interest in using cold as a way to stimulate testosterone, this is mainly because in the sports community, in particular, in the bodybuilding community, they are always seeking ways to maximize testosterone, dihydrotestosterone, keep estrogen to its minimum required to still have a libido and still have skin elasticity but also walk around with Saran-wrap skin, then all this kind of extreme stuff that happens there has led to a recent movement where, believe it or not, I heard this and I couldn't believe it, I went and checked, but although I didn't buy them, that on Amazon, you can actually find, they're literally underwear that have ice packs, so I think they are ice pack underwear, so that people are making themselves cold at the level of the gonads in order to try and increase testosterone and libido, sounds pretty crazy, but believe it or not, that and things like ice baths and cold showers can have positive effects on the sex steroid hormones, both testosterone, mainly in males, and estrogen, mainly in females, and you might say, "Wait, I thought cold "makes the reproductive axis kind of shut down a bit "or reduces testosterone and estrogen," but it turns out it's not actually the cold that's having these effects in people, things like the ice bath, cold showers, cold-water swims, these ice underwear or whatever they are, can't believe that these actually exist, but they do exist, what happens is there's a rebound in vasodilation after cooling, so cooling causes vasoconstriction, and then after the cooling, there's a rebound vasodilation and there's more infusion of blood into the gonads. There's also an effect that's neural, so let me explain how this works because there are only a few studies on this, none of which looking at the frozen underwear, but that have looked at cold exposure and levels of androgens and estrogens, and it's kind of interesting, so you have to remember that the gonad, the ovaries and the testes are heavily vascularized. Remember, even at the level of the brain, GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing hormone, comes from neurons that, believe it or not, start off in your nose early in development, migrate into the hypothalamus. I'm not making that up, they started off in your nose and migrated to the hypothalamus. Those neurons extend processes, we call them axons, into the pituitary and release GnRH into the pituitary. There's a lot of vascularization within the pituitary, so now those hormones, or GnRH, can stimulate follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone, which then are released and travel into the bloodstream. Then those hormones reach the ovary or testes, and they have to get into the ovary and testes, and the way they do that is through the vascular system, and people forget, but the vascular system and how constricted or dilated vessels are is controlled by neurons, all right? We discussed this during the discussion about stress in the stress episode, but it's well-known to neuroscientists that the best way to shut down neurons is to cool them, so there are a lot of examples of this in the scientific literature, but most people aren't aware of it because you're not digging around in the method section of these papers, but when we want to shut down neurons, we can do things like inject drugs that will do that, like lidocaine, you know, the stuff that makes you numb at the dentist, or you can use different inhibitors, but one of the best ways to do it experimentally is to just cool neurons, when you make neurons cold, because there's a temperature dependence of when neurons can be active and when they can't, the neurons shut down, so the most plausible explanation for why cold exposure, either through 1 to 10-minute ice bath or cold shower or the ice underpants thing, would increase testosterone or increase estrogen is that you're cooling the neurons that control vasoconstriction and vasodilation and shutting down the entry of blood, or at least reducing it, and hormones into the gonad, and then when the gonad and the surrounding area heats up again, you're getting a rebound hyper-vasodilation that delivers excessive levels of, not excessive, but increased levels of GnRH and other hormones and carriers and carrier proteins and so forth that would then stimulate the gonad to release more testosterone or would stimulate the gonad to release more estrogen, that's the most plausible explanation I can come up with, there aren't a lot of studies looking at direct effects of temperature on the gonad, and it's going to be a difficult study to carry out in any case because unless it were done in vitro in a dish, it's very hard to eliminate all the other things like vasoconstriction and vasodilation, put simply, we don't know whether or not cold and heat directly affect the production of testosterone and estrogen, we only know that cold and heat can modulate those, probably through indirect mechanisms like controlling the amount of blood flow by way of shutting down or activating the neurons. Now, there's a lot of lore around heating up the gonads too much, there's actually a whole set of pseudoscience webpages out there saying, "Well, if you want a girl, "you should conceive the child at this room temperature, "and if you want a boy, "you should conceive the child at this room temperature." I don't think there's really any firm scientific evidence for that, for either one, but there's some interesting literature about temperature dependence of production of hormones, and I think that it probably relates to these mechanisms of vasodilation and neural control over vasodilation, and of course, excessively high heat is not good for the testes, for sperm production, or for sperm health, sperm have all sorts of proteins in the cap, things like pentraxins and other things that cause them to swim faster when they're expressed properly and in the right locations, and heat actually alters the location and the function of a lot of those proteins, they're very heat sensitive, and so that's why excessive heat is truly not good for fertility, which may be independent of heat's roles in promoting estrogen or testosterone. Okay, so now we've talked about breathing, light, and temperature, we talked about parenthood, we talked about competition, and we talked about some pheromone effects, now let's talk about particular forms of exercise and how they modulate the steroid hormones, and then we're going to talk about various supplements, both in reference to testosterone and in reference to estrogen. So now let's talk about how exercise in its various forms, weight training, endurance work, weight training to failure, or less intense weight training can impact testosterone levels, but I want to remind you that we're talking about testosterone both in males and females, and based on what you know from earlier in the episode, testosterone can have numerous positive effects in both males and females provided they're in optimal range. So if you look on the web, people will say, "Oh, you know, "testosterone is increased by weight training, "you want to do these big, heavy compound movements," squats and deadlifts and chins and things of that sort, but what about the scientific studies? Like, what's the actual basis for this? Because if you just take a step back and look at this from the perspective of a scientist, you'd say, okay, what is a squat? A squat is loading up a bunch of weights on a bar and then, you know, sitting down, essentially, and standing up over and over again. What's a deadlift? It's lifting heavy weights from the ground. Why would that increase testosterone, right? This is what's often not discussed in the weight training or even the exercise science community, what would actually stimulate the release of testosterone from the adrenals and/or testes, and which one is it, adrenals or testes or both? And that's often not discussed, but as a neuroscientist, these are the kinds of things we think about because we think always that genes don't create behavior, immune systems don't know when to be activated, lungs don't know when to inhale or exhale, hearts don't know when to beat except for the information that it gets from neurons, the nervous system controls all of that, and so really the answer has to be in the neural system that's related to these particular types of weight-bearing exercises. So when you go into this literature, it's kind of hard to find real mechanism, you see a lot of effects, you'll hear things like, androgen receptor content, meaning testosterone and its derivatives, receptor content following heavy-resistance exercise, and you'll find some examples that, for instance, you know, they do muscle biopsies, they can actually see receptor increases, looking at either high-volume or low-volume really intense exercise, and you can find a lot of that but not a lot of mechanism about how the nervous system would do this, and the reason you'd want to know how it can do it is that you could potentially build better protocols or figure out exactly what about these movements is triggering increases in androgen receptors and testosterone. So what's interesting is when you start digging into the more mechanistic studies, what you find is that heavy weight training, so this is weight training where the sets are done with anywhere from kind of one to eight rep range, and this translates differently depending on ratio of muscle fiber type and so forth, but where basically people are working at anywhere from like, 70% to 95% of their maximum, or sometimes even going right down to their one-repetition maximum, really kind of max effort, what you find is that using the nervous system in a way in which they're moving heavy loads, so that I would translate to recruitment of high-threshold motor units, for you muscle physiologists, and there's a rule in muscle physiology about the neuron recruitment for moving muscles where you basically use the minimum number of motor units of neurons to activate muscle as you possibly can, as loads increase, you have to recruit more and more neurons, you always hear about recruiting muscle fibers, but really, it's recruiting more neurons to recruit more muscle fibers, and what you find is that heavy weight training, but not weight training to failure where completion of a repetition is impossible, leads to the greatest increases in testosterone. Now, I'm sure there are a bunch of exercise jockeys out there that are going to come at me with a bunch of things where, oh, yeah, but high volume and this, and training to failure and that, sure, if you're willing to kind of put things side by side, adjust for exogenous testosterone treatment and all the rest, which was done in these studies, what you find in general is that weight training with heavy loads, so anywhere from one-rep maximum to somewhere in the six to eight repetition range, in males or females, increases testosterone significantly, and it does it for about a day, sometimes up to 48 hours, and the studies that I found which seem to hold the most rigor or weight based on where they're published as opposed to being published in the journal of "Never Heard of It," they're published in good-quality exercise physiology journals, for instance, the paper by Ratamess, R-A-T-A-M-E-S-S et al., which was published in 2005, which talks about modulations in androgen receptor content after heavy resistance exercise, looks at going to failure and not to failure, the work of Izquierdo et al. published in 2006, "Differential Effects of Strength Training "Leading to Failure Versus Not Failure "on Hormonal Responses, Strength, and Power Gains," you know, there are a lot of studies here and I will certainly put the links to these in the caption, many of these actually include Duncan French, who runs the UFC training center who I've had the privilege of meeting and discussing some of this with before, as well as other authors, of course, but they all point to the fact that there's something about the engagement of the neurons that recruit high-threshold motor units in muscle when moving heavy loads, but not to failure, that has to provide some sort of feedback signal, either to the gonad to produce more testosterone, or is increasing the activity of receptors in the body. Now, why do I say that? Well, this is the puzzle, right? How is it that a particular movement, just like how is it that interacting with your child, is increasing or decreasing testosterone? This is the kind of fundamental question at the mechanistic level, and we answered the question for child-rearing, it has probably something to do with smell and pheromones, although I'm sure there are other cues as well, but there's clearly a influence of hard work at the neural level and then at the muscular level for increasing testosterone, and there's also clearly an effect of working too hard and presumably increasing cortisol too much, although I'm speculating there, in terms of reducing testosterone, and so the reason we're getting nitty-gritty about this is because ultimately, we'd really like to understand, what are the optimal protocols? You know, out there in the literature, you hear, move heavy objects to increase testosterone, some of that will be converted to the more powerful androgen, DHT, by 5-alpha reductase et cetera, but we really don't understand yet how these particular behaviors increase testosterone and whether or not it's doing that by modulating the receptors or it's modulating testosterone release directly, presumably, testosterone release directly and sensitivity of the receptors, that what most of the muscle physiology studies that I was able to find point to, but this basically boils down to a particular set of protocols where if you want to increase testosterone, for whatever reason, that weight training with heavy loads but not to failure seems to be the best-supported, at least scientifically supported, solution to that, now, it may not raise your testosterone levels as high as you want, but it's definitely taking things in the correct direction. Now, many of you might be endurance athletes or also enjoy exercise besides heavy-weight-bearing exercise, and there are several studies exploring whether or not endurance activity can increase or decrease androgen levels and whether or not you combine endurance activity and weight training, whether or not that has any effect if you do the endurance activity first or second, and the takeaway from all of this was that endurance activity, if performed first, leads to decreases in testosterone during the weight training session as compared to the same weight training session done first followed by endurance activity, in other words, if you want to optimize testosterone levels, it seems to be the case that weight training first and doing cardio-type endurance activity afterward is the right order of business. Now, when these are done on separate days, it doesn't seem to have an effect, they showed no statistical interaction, but it seems that if you're going to do these in the same workout episode that it's move heavy loads first, then do cardiovascular exercise, so there's a little bit of data looking specifically at how endurance exercise impacts testosterone and its derivatives, and it's very clear that high-intensity interval training, sprinting et cetera, which somewhat mimics the neural activity that occurs while moving heavy weight loads, is going to increase testosterone and there's ample evidence for that in the literature, and that endurance exercise that extends beyond 75 minutes is going to start to lead to reductions in testosterone, presumably by increases in cortisol, but of course, the intensity of the exercise is going to be important too, you know, I don't think anyone really believes that hiking for three hours is going to reduce your testosterone, whereas I think if one were to go out and run hard for three hours that you can imagine there'd be reductions in testosterone by way of increases in cortisol, and so while this area certainly needs more research, it's pretty clear that limiting the endurance exercise to 75 minutes or less, not making it too intense, is one way to keep cortisol from going through the roof, but I've talked on previous episodes, and there are a lot of others who have talked out there about how to clamp cortisol, how to keep cortisol more reduced, this is also one of the reasons why, you can imagine, that various individuals, either for competition or just for their own purposes, rely on testosterone therapy, exogenous testosterone, not just for weight training, but for endurance exercise, so this is one of the reasons why every once in a while, professional cyclists will get popped for performance-enhancing drugs, meaning they'll get caught, and it's not just that they're increasing red blood cells through EPO and things of that sort, oftentimes they're also taking testosterone not because they want to be large or have massively hypertrophied muscles, but because they're injecting testosterone, they don't have to worry about cortisol-induced reductions in testosterone, and they can just clamp, or keep their testosterone levels high, not something I'm recommending, but I'm just justifying the rationale for why an endurance athlete would want to do that at all. So now let's switch over to talking about estrogen, so there are many people who are trying to optimize their estrogen levels, and one of the places where this shows up a lot and I get a lot of questions about is menopause, so menopause, as I mentioned earlier, is this fairly massive reduction in the amount of estrogen that is circulating in one's blood mainly because the ovary is now depleted of some estrogen production of its own, the eggs are not being produced, they've been depleted, et cetera. So menopause is characterized by a variety of symptoms, and it's multifaceted, probably deserves an entire episode on its own, but things like hot flashes, things like mood swings, things like headaches, in particular migraine headaches, there can be a lot of brain fog, it can be very, very disruptive for people. Now, you sometimes hear about andropause, which is thought to be the kind of analog to menopause, but menopause has certain characteristics that make it a very robust phenomenon for most women, whereas for men, andropause is going to sometimes happen, sometimes won't, in fact, without going into the details of the graphs and the data, it's very clear, as I mentioned earlier, that some men maintain levels of circulating androgens that are quite high, even as similar as they were in puberty and their teen years and 20s, well into their 60s, 70s, and 80s if they're optimizing a lot of other things, and probably genetics plays a role as well, whereas some males won't, but within the female population, or population of individuals that have ovaries, there's a very stereotyped and characteristic reduction in estrogen levels as the number of eggs becomes depleted, and that's what we think of as menopause. So what are the various things that one can do for menopause? Well, one of the most common ones is that physicians will prescribe supplemental estrogen, so this is hormone therapy where somebody takes either their oral estrogen or they'll use a patch or a pellet, some way to secrete estradiol into the system, and that has varying success depending on the individual, some people respond very well to it, other people really have challenges with it, and there are a lot of side effects associated with it for some people, not others, in addition, there's a concern always about supplementing estrogen when there's a breast cancer background in the family or there's concern about breast cancer for any reason because a lot of those cancers are estrogen-dependent, and that's why drugs like tamoxifen and anastrozole and drugs that block either aromatase or block, excuse me, estrogen receptors directly were initially developed, you see them a lot on the internet, again, for all the sports folks who are trying to increase testosterone, reduce estrogen, but remember, those drugs were initially developed as ways to prevent estrogen binding to the estrogen receptor as cancer treatments, so I want to be very clear and I've said this many times, we always put it in the caption of each episode, of course, that I'm not a physician, I'm not an M.D., I don't prescribe anything, I'm a professor and I profess things, I'm here to translate the scientific literature and point to what might be some useful avenues for exploration, but this is just for information purposes, you should definitely talk to your doctor about anything that I'm talking about now or in any episode, for that matter. So if you look at the literature on menopause outside of just standard estrogen therapy, there are some very interesting compounds out there that have been used and that are supported by quality peer-reviewed studies, and again, I'll refer you once again to this amazing website, examine.com, where you can put in essentially any condition or any supplement, and it will point you to the human effect matrix, not animal studies, but human studies that have explored these things. Now, there are a huge variety of them here so I won't go into all of them, but some of the pro-estrogenic compounds that have been shown to be powerful in the context of menopause, as well as other conditions where estrogen is lower than one would like, include a description in some of the literature, I'll get into this in a moment, of something like black cohosh, I think that's the correct pronunciation, it's literally the word black and then C-O-H-O-S-H, and it's very interesting, there are 13 peer-reviewed studies that have reached prominence in the kind of commercial landscape where this substance, black cohosh, has been promoted as a way to increase estrogen, turns out that the effects are consistent but are fairly minor, fairly minor increases in estrogen, so it does seem to be a real effect, it is significant over the placebo effect, but there's also a significant placebo effect in some of these studies as well, so what's interesting when you look at these studies is that many of them were carried out over a period of six-plus months, they're double-blind studies, et cetera, and almost all of them lead to modest increases in estrogen and modest decreases in menopause-related symptoms. Now, a few additional details about these studies, they were generally carried out on women age 45 to 64, in some cases, they look specifically at women that were clinically obese or overweight, although not always, the subject size pools are pretty big, you know, anywhere from 50 to 87, these are decent size, 132 subjects, et cetera, so these look to be like quality studies, and they basically point to the fact that black cohosh can have a modest effect in improving menopause symptoms. The other one is Panax ginseng, so P-N-A-A-X ginseng, has been shown to decrease some symptoms associated with menopause, mostly related to libido, although the other effects were unreliable. Other things, like maca, which is known to increase dopamine actually, had minor effects, things like, the names here are a little hard to pronounce, so forgive me, things like Valeriana officinalis has shown that there can be some improvement in the hot flash symptoms and some of the insomnia associated with that, so that might be worth exploring, again, discuss with your doctor, but these were both 100-subject plus, age 45 to 64 individuals, double-blind placebo-controlled studies that showed significant but modest effects. There was one substance in the gallery of the compounds that was looked at that turns out to be particularly interesting, and this one is also particularly difficult to pronounce, and it's Pueraria mirifica, so I'm going to spell this out for you, it's P-U-E-R-A-R-I-A, Pueraria, mirifica, M-I-R-I-F-I-C-A, and there are four studies on this compound that show, in every case, it to be very potent, in fact, comparable to estrogen therapy, estrogen replacement therapy, in reducing the symptoms of menopause, so this was pretty striking because when you go through these studies and you look again that they seem to be pretty well controlled, as far as I could tell, and they explored a pretty wide subject pool, and it seems that every single one of these studies, when looking side by side at Pueraria mirifica, which is also called, now this is really hard to pronounce, Kwao Krua Kao, I guess that's the name that they use in various countries, that it was comparable to estrogen replacement therapy, so I mentioned this because a lot of people contacted me and said, "What about the insomnia in menopause? "What about the headaches in menopause?" Now, I'm not suggesting you run out and immediately start taking any of these compounds, please talk to your doctor, you know, any hormone-related compound is a serious consideration because of the relationship to breast cancers, but just in general, these compounds are, estrogen and testosterone, are exceedingly powerful in terms of controlling our mental and physical states, and so you want to approach them with caution, but I thought that that one in particular was interesting and for which there are quite a few PubMed-documented, peer-reviewed studies in quality journals. Okay, so now let's talk about the role of specific compounds, some of which, many of which can be taken in supplementation form or extracted from diet and nutrition in order to optimize sex steroid hormones, and again, I just want to emphasize that I'm not suggesting anyone take anything or stop taking anything, this is purely for informational purposes, but some of the data on these is quite striking and impressive. It's very clear that certain collections of nutrients are useful for promoting testosterone and estrogen production in their proper ratios, and those things are what I would call the sort of usual suspects, vitamin D, which is important for so many biological functions, including endocrine functions, zinc, magnesium, et cetera, and if you want to look into this more deeply and you want to understand exactly what the negative effects are of not having sufficient zinc and magnesium, and what those levels might actually be, there's a paper that's available, you can go on PubMed, I can't pronounce this last name, I'm sorry, it looks to me like Wrzosek, but it's W-R-Z-O-S-E-K, I hope I didn't butcher that too badly, Wrzosek et al. 2020 in "Endocrinology and Metabolism Review," so this is a recent paper in a good, peer-reviewed journal that talks mainly about how the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and the sex steroid hormones are negatively impacted by deficiencies in magnesium, deficiencies in vitamin D, and deficiencies in zinc, however, that doesn't point to the levels that one should take in order to optimize, so it doesn't say take X amount of zinc or X amount of magnesium or X amount of vitamin D, for that information, because it's so context-dependent and individual-dependent, I highly recommend you go to examine.com, you can put in zinc or magnesium or vitamin D, and they will give you ranges of dosages that are supported by specific studies, again, that information is completely free to you, and it's very useful in figuring that out. I personally have supplemented with zinc, magnesium, and vitamin D for years, but many other people do that as well, and the question is always, how much? And that's why I'm a proponent of getting blood work done because that's how you know whether or not your androgen levels, as well as things like vitamin D levels, et cetera, are sufficiently high, so the takeaway from these studies looking at what deficiencies cause in terms of deficits in testosterone and estrogen really point in the direction of, make sure you're getting adequate zinc, magnesium, and D3 unless you want these steroid hormone levels to be reduced for whatever reason. One of the things that's been shown time and time again to have very negative effects on sex steroid hormones, testosterone mainly men, estrogen mainly in women, is opioids. There's this whole issue, of course, of the opioid epidemic, it's deserving of an entire episode, we are going to talk about that with experts in addiction and people that treat pain and so forth, but the opioids dramatically reduce levels of testosterone and estrogen, and they do that mainly by disrupting the receptors on gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons, these neurons within the hypothalamus that communicate to the pituitary, and in fact, people that take large amounts of opioids, or even take low levels of opioids for long periods of time, will develop all sorts of endocrine syndromes, that's been shown over and over again, gynecomastia, or male breast development in males, disruptions to the ovary in females, it's really a quite terrible situation, so excessive opioids are very problematic for sex steroid hormones, I don't think anyone will have any trouble finding any literature on that, you can just go into PubMed, you can put opioids, testosterone, or opioids, estrogen, but the major effect is actually way up in the hypothalamus to shut down the production of GnRH, the very hormone that stimulates testosterone and estrogen release. Now, there's an entire industry devoted to supplements and various things that people can take to increase testosterone, some of which have scientific data to support them, some of which do not, and some of which have anecdotal support and some of which do not. This ranges so broadly, I mean, things like the material off deer antlers, which is high in, supposedly, IGF1, which is in the growth hormone pathway, all the way to actual consumption of bull testes, you can go on Amazon right now, I certainly don't suggest that you do this, and you can actually buy ground up testes from cows, and you can consume those, now, a lot of that's going to be broken down in the gut, I'm certainly not suggesting you do that, but just the point out this is a huge and vast literature, and it actually dates back hundreds of years even though testosterone wasn't discovered that long ago as a specific hormone molecule and characterized and then resynthesized, it has a huge industry because of the powerful effects that it has, likewise with estrogen, the development of the birth control pill was only made possible by understanding the structure of estrogen and estradiol, and we're going to talk all about birth control and how it works and its influence on various other pathways in a future episode, but there are these supplement compounds that are supported by the scientific literature in terms of their ability to adjust androgens, things like testosterone and dihydrotestosterone. One of the ones that has really good evidence for it is creatine, it's very clear that something about creatine, although the mechanism isn't exactly clear, either increases 5-alpha reductase or makes the testosterone molecule more susceptible to certain enzymatic reactions that leads to increases in DHT, DHT, dihydrotestosterone, as I mentioned in the previous episode, has this dramatic role in creating a kind of masculinization of the brain prenatally, it also defines the primary sex characteristic of the growth of the penis, et cetera, and beyond infancy and early childhood and later in life, it has powerful effects in creating balding, in beard growth, et cetera, and it has a much higher affinity for the androgen receptor than does testosterone, so creatine can increase DHT, which means that if you take creatine and you're very DHT-susceptible, then you might experience some hair loss, this has been heavily debated, does creatine cause baldness? It's going to depend, it's going to depend on how much 5-alpha reductase you have and how prone to hair loss you are, some people can take creatine without any problem in terms of hair loss, some people cannot, they start losing their hair to levels that, at least for them, aren't comfortable. There are a few other things that can increase testosterone and it has to do with the way that testosterone exists in its free and its bound form, so testosterone, the molecule is kind of total testosterone, that's usually what's measured, this is the kind of levels that are typically thrown around of anywhere from 300 to 900 being the kind of natural range, and then supraphysiological, getting up into 1,200, 1,600 range, but testosterone isn't just roaming around free in the blood, at least most of it isn't, most of it is bound to either sex hormone binding globulin, SHBG, or to albumin, they're needed as transporters to get testosterone into cells so that testosterone can have its effects on gene expression as well as other pathways within the cells, so people talk about that the level of free testosterone is really what's important and that you want to optimize free testosterone, that's a little bit of a tricky statement, that's kind of like, it's true, and yet, it's not really reflective of a thorough understanding of how these binding globulins work, remember, these binding globulins aren't there to soak up all your testosterone just to make it hard for you to free up testosterone and you know, make gains in the gym or whatever it is, or have increases in libido, they're there to actually transport testosterone to specific tissues, to shuttle them to specific tissues and to set the rate of bound and unbound testosterone so that's it's not all unbound at once, and you know, it's always interesting to look in the literature and see how everyone wants to free up their testosterone so that it can work, but sex hormone binding globulin can bind up too much testosterone to the point where it's having negative effects on libido or on muscle growth and fat loss and things of that sort, this is true in males and females, or it can be doing exactly what it's supposed to do, which is shuttling testosterone to the proper tissues and organs where it has all these effects, including the brain. So there are supplements, in particular, tongkat ali, which is, it has this other name, it's something called tongkat ali, sometimes it's called, and forgive me that it's hard to pronounce, but Eurycoma longifolia Jack, they always seem to have these names that kind of allude to androgenic features, like I don't know why, longifolia Jack, I don't know, I think it's kind of obvious why that sounds sort of androgenic. This has been shown in several studies, and you can find these on examine.com, or you can go to PubMed if you like, I've looked at these, that it does seem to have some pro-fertility, pro-free testosterone, and subtle aphrodisiac effects, it does also seem to be a slight anti-estrogen, so the reports of this are, people take this anywhere from 400 to 800 milligrams a day, again, I'm not suggesting you do that, but that's kind of what's out there, and there is some decent scientific literature to support the fact that it liberates some of the bound testosterone and allows more free testosterone to be available, some of the reported quote-unquote side effects are things like excessive alertness and insomnia if it's taken too late in the day and so forth, but I encourage you to explore that further if that's, if increasing free testosterone is something that you're interested in doing. Examine.com includes a lot of other things that can increase testosterone, one of the things that's been purported to free up testosterone in the blood are things like nettles, stinging nettles, although I should point out that the literature points to stinging nettle also having some fairly potent effects on the prostate and on the liver, and so it might be a tricky molecule and maybe not an attractive one for people to take. So we talked about creatine, we talked about tongkat ali, it's clear that boron, which is really interesting, believe it or not, I think boron comes from, I think these were like, meteors that landed on Earth and now they extract boron, it's one of these crazy stories that, when you look at it, you go like, "How could that possibly be?" but there's actually, that's how it works, that boron, there's some scientific support for it freeing up more testosterone, and again, freeing up testosterone may be exactly what you want, I just don't think that we should demonize these carrier proteins like albumin and SHBG, in fact, albumin is very important for testosterone to be able to make it into the brain to have some of the pro-androgenic effects on the cognitive effects of testosterone because in both males and females, testosterone can shift these behaviors, like mate-seeking, reductions in anxiety, and so forth, that we talked about before, only by making it into the brain, and there is this thing called the blood-brain barrier, which is fascinating and deserving of an entire episode also, and getting molecules across the blood-brain barrier, even if they're sex steroid hormones, which are lipophilic and can pass through cell membranes, requires carriers, and those carriers often are bound to or include albumin, and so it's not the goal to free up all your testosterone, but getting free testosterone into a range that works for your particular goals and needs is an attractive one, and that's why we're discussing these particular tools. The amounts of boron that people take, and you can find this, again, on PubMed or Examine, but people take a couple grams of it a day, I'm not aware of any specific side effects, but you always, always, always want to examine for the particular side effects and people with different backgrounds and conditions, as we talked about for menopause and estrogen, have to be careful because when you're starting to modulate hormones, you're starting to modulate not just the tissues that thrive on binding of those hormones, but remember, the reason why there's so much breast cancer and there's a reason why there's so much testicular cancer is that any tissue that undergoes rapid reproduction of particular cells, so there's a lot of reproduction of cells in shedding of uterine lining and the reproduction of cells and eggs in the ovary, and in the testes, there's the production of Leydig and sertoli cells, and there's this kind of ongoing production of sperm, that's why those tissues are particularly vulnerable to the development of cancers, and many of those cancers are androgen-sensitive, that's why one of the major treatments for prostate overgrowth or prostate cancer is to give anti-androgenic drugs, okay? It's not just to shut down all things related to being androgenized, it's really about trying to prevent testosterone from encouraging growth of tumors, so I want to really emphasize the caution there because it's easy when thinking about optimizing estrogen and testosterone to just think, oh, more is better, more is definitely not better, and it's not just because they can aromatize or convert into other things, it's because cancers, or any tissue that has a lot of turnover of cells, is going to thrive on androgen, anything that promotes growth is going to thrive on estrogen, remember, brain tissue doesn't turn over that much, there isn't really much production of new neurons, brain cancers happen but they're kind of rare, and when they do happen, they tend to be glial cells, which have a lot of proliferation, glial cells can proliferate, adult neurons don't create more of themselves, they don't create more neurons, in general, except in a few places in the brain and body, so any tissue that recycles itself is prone to cancers, and those tissues thrive on androgens and estrogens to create more tumor, so you have to be careful anytime you're modulating hormones, especially androgens and estrogens, and in my scouring of the literature and looking at kind of what's out there and what people are talking about, and I also mean in the scientific literature, one of the things that is new to me, anyway, probably not new to a lot of the gym rats out there, or the people that spend a lot of time on YouTube videos talking about androgens, are these, forgive me for butchering the name again, are these ecdysteroids, so ecdysteroids are molecules that come from things like spinach, believe it or not, that have a lot of similarity to the cholesterol molecule, the one that's being discussed a lot out there right now is something called turkesterone, I wish I knew why it was called turkesterone, someone tell me why it's called turkesterone, does it have anything to do with turkeys? I don't know why it's called turkesterone, perhaps someone will know. In any case, these ecdysteroids are similar enough to cholesterol, and remember, cholesterol is the precursor to testosterone, cortisol, and estrogen, and it appears that some of these ecdysteroids do have bioavailability, or their metabolites are bioavailable, and this was something that, for many years, people talked about whether or not insect hormones or hormones from other species could actually be used by humans or whether or not it would have any effect at all, and it's pretty clear based on a study that I was able to find, there's a paper that came out in 2019, it's a comparative study in the "Archives of Toxicology," this is Isenmann et al., I-S-E-N-M-A-N-N et al., that talks about the ecdysteroids and it was given in conjunction with strength training or no strength training, this was a 10-week intervention, and their conclusion is that these ecdysteroids had a fairly significant, above placebo controls, increases in muscle mass, strength, hypertrophy effects, all the sorts of things that one would expect with increases in androgen, their conclusion of this study is not my conclusion, although I may or may not agree with them, this isn't about my opinions, it's just, I want to be clear, these are their words, not mine, but they say that, in their words, quote, "Our results strongly suggest "the inclusion of ecdysteroid "in the list of prohibited substances." So they're saying these things are so powerful that they should be on the list of banned substances, which might be upsetting to some, or some of you might be thinking, well, who cares? The whole issue of augmenting hormones in sports is a very interesting issue, in fact, if you just want a little anecdote about that, I can't reveal names here, of course, but what I learned recently was very surprising to me which is that many athletes in pro sports are taking testosterone, and they are able to do that legally not just because it's available by prescription, but they are allowed to do that under the rules of their sport in the fine print that no one, including me, had ever seen, if they've had an injury, so if athletes are injured, then it opens up the door for certain forms of testosterone augmentation and other types of augmentations that are not available to them if they're not injured, which always makes me wonder now when I see them getting injured whether or not that's an attempt to get some of the support because there's absolutely no question that estrogens and testosterones modulate gene expression, modulate strength, modulate the way the brain works, modulates our relationship to effort and anxiety, et cetera, and while we're talking about supplementation, the effects of supplementation, I would say, in some individuals can be quite dramatic, but they're always, always, always, except in extreme cases, going to be far subtler, excuse me, far more subtle, to use the proper English, far more subtle than would be, for instance, just in injecting testosterone or injecting estrogen, et cetera, so I think we should just be honest and upfront about that. So thus far in terms of talking about optimizing hormones and in the discussion of supplementation, I haven't really talked about things that actually affect the brain directly, that increase the pituitary output and things of that sort, we've mainly been talking about things that free up testosterone or that increase estrogen at the level of the periphery, but if you remember way back to the beginning of this episode, hormones are made in different locations in the body and there are hormones that promote the release and the production of hormones from other tissues in the body, and one of the main hormones for that is luteinizing hormone, luteinizing hormone, again, comes from the pituitary, circulates and either goes to the ovary to promote various aspects of egg maturation as well as production of estrogen, and to the testes to promote testosterone and sperm production, and the prescription version of increasing luteinizing hormone is something called hCG, or human chorionic gonadotropin, which has been synthesized and is now available as a prescription drug, it's taken in various contexts for increasing fertility both by males and by females, it can increase, for all the reasons that now make sense, it can increase sperm production, it can produce ovulation frequency, it can produce the number of eggs, even, that are deployed in a given ovulation, although that's not always a good thing, it basically is pro-fertility, pro-testosterone, pro-estrogen depending on your background, and what's interesting is hCG was initially synthesized, collected and synthesized from pregnant women's urine, and believe it or not, before it was synthetically made and sold as a prescription drug, there was actually a black market for pregnant women's urine where people would buy the urine, I don't know, I'm guessing that they probably just consumed it, which is weird, but in any case, human chorionic gonadotropin is now available as a prescription drug and it's one of the things that many people use to increase testosterone or estrogen for increasing fertility, in some cases I think it's used to increase sports performance or when people have shut down their gonads for whatever reason because of excessive hormone therapies or they have some sort of, sometimes there are actually lesions to the pituitary, sometimes people have a tumor in the pituitary, it's actually not common, but among brain tumors and neural tumors, it's one of the more common ones, and then you get deficiencies in LH and FSH, and so people will take hCG to stimulate the gonads, so there are a variety of reasons why these drugs were created, but there are certain supplements, not many, that apparently can increase luteinizing hormone and thereby can increase testosterone and estrogen, and one of the more well-documented one is Fadogia agrestis, that's F-A-D-O-G-I-A, separate word, A-G-R-E-S-T-I-S, which, at least according to the literature that I was able to find, can increase levels of luteinizing hormone and thereby levels of testosterone or levels of estrogen, and again, if an individual were to take Fadogia agrestis, what they would probably find is that testosterone and estrogen would increase in anyone of any chromosomal or gonadal background, but remember, it's the ratio of both, if someone has low estrogen and high testosterone, let's say they have testes just by way of example, then both of those would be expected to increase, and if someone has high estrogen and low testosterone, and let's just say has ovaries, then both of those would increase by taking Fadogia agrestis. The side effect profile of Fadogia agrestis hasn't really been documented, so it's a little unclear, I just want to emphasize that anytime someone's going to start taking supplements, or modifying sex steroid hormones, getting blood work done is extremely important for safety reasons, and also just to know whether or not things are working, and because all of these things are subject to negative feedback, talked about this previously on a previous episode, but if testosterone goes high, or too high, it can feed back and shut down luteinizing hormone, which will then shut down further testosterone production, likewise, if estrogens are going too high or they're going too high at various phases of the cycle, that can start to throw off various other hormones, including FSH, progesterone, LH, the menstrual cycle itself is a just absolutely exquisite balance of feedback of luteinizing hormone kept low and constant, at least for the first 14 days of the cycle, then mid cycle, there's a peak, and that's typically when ovulation occurs, that's why pregnancy is most likely during the middle of the 28-day cycle, FSH kind of goes up and then down across the first 14 days, so taking anything or really modifying one's estrogens or testosterone on that background of the menstrual cycle is really going to disrupt the way those things interact, and it's just such an exquisite feedback loop, so I'm not saying don't do that, but you definitely want to be aware of what you're doing, and blood draws are one way to do that, monitoring cycles for ovulating females is another way to do that, and in males, having a good window into what's going on with testosterone, DHT, aromatase, estradiol, LH, et cetera, is just vital, and it's really part and parcel with the practice of thinking about optimizing these incredible things that we call sex steroid hormones, estrogen and testosterone and their derivatives. The list of supplements and molecules that can adjust estrogen and testosterone is vast, and I only touched on a few of these, I really tried to emphasize the ones for which there are human studies or that have mostly human studies, or maybe even just one human study, there are other things out there for which there are scientific data, things like Bulbine natalensis, which definitely has support for increasing testosterone but all the studies were in rats, I think there is some evidence in humans but the evidence mainly comes in the form of what we call sponsored research, so companies paying for research, which is different than independent research by people who are not biased in terms of the outcome, and the reason I didn't throw out things like Bulbine natalensis is they seem to have liver toxicity similar to high levels of anabolic exogenous steroids, there's some problems associated with them that make them, you know, important to think about if you're curious about this area and the endocrinology, but also somewhat precarious, and you know, that's one category, so stuff that doesn't have a lot of evidence in humans, might actually be dangerous, the other category of things that has been shown to improve levels of, or increase, I should say, I don't want to say improve because it's up to you whether or not you want to increase or decrease estrogen and testosterone, that's highly individual, how could I know, are the things that are kind of housekeeping for production of estrogen and testosterone, things like magnesium, things like D3, things like zinc, you know, those are the things that are going to create an overall milieu of opportunity to produce normal endogenous levels rather than increasing endogenous levels further, and so I really want to highlight that there's a difference between taking something to create a kind of backdrop of general support and taking something that's going to create a big inflection in the levels of a given hormone. So once again, we covered a tremendous amount of information, we covered some basic science of hormones and pheromones, estrogen and testosterone and their derivatives, we talked about supplementation and behaviors, competition and parenting, and how all these things interact, and I hope that you'll come away from this with a deeper mechanistic understanding of how the brain and body are interacting to control the output and the ways in which these incredible things that we call sex steroid hormones work and influence us, I hope you'll also come away with some ideas of things that you can do, in particular, behavioral practices that can improve sleep and your relationship to light, et cetera, because those things really set the foundation not just for healthy steroid hormone output, but for all sorts of health effects and for both the psychology and the biology of your nervous system, so I'm sure there'll be many questions, there are many things that I couldn't get to today, I do try and limit these episodes to about 90 minutes, which is the optimal ultradian cycle for learning, it's a lot of information, but we've timestamped everything for you, so feel free to look over it in parts or circle back where you might want deeper understanding, and please put your questions in the comments section below, please put suggestions for future episodes and things that relate to hormones in the comments section below, we do look at those and we do use them to inform the content for subsequent episodes. If you're enjoying and learning from this podcast, please subscribe on YouTube, or if you prefer, please subscribe on Apple and/or Spotify. At Apple, you have the opportunity also to leave us up to a five-star review and to leave a comment in the review section. Please also inform your friends, family, coworkers, anyone that you think might also benefit from the information that we're covering, that really helps us grow our audience and bring more information to you. As well, please check out our sponsors mentioned at the beginning of each episode, and we also have a Patreon, that's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. At the Patreon, you can help support the podcast at any level that you like. As well, we've partnered with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E, which is a supplement company, the reason we partner with Thorne is that they have the highest levels of stringency in terms of the quality of the supplements that they make and the quantity of the individual ingredients, something that's not always the case with various supplement companies, but Thorne is exquisitely good about the stringency of their products, they partner with the Mayo Clinic and all the major sports teams. If you want to check out Thorne and see the supplements that I take, you can go to thorne.com/u/huberman, and if you do that, you can see the supplements I take, but as well, it will allow you to get 20% off any of those supplements or any of the other supplements that Thorne makes, that's Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E, .com/u/huberman to get 20% off any Thorne supplements. In closing, I hope you'll leave today's episode with a much richer understanding of the mechanisms that control the endocrine and nervous system in the context of estrogen and testosterone, as well as take away various tools that you might choose to apply, and next week, we'll be back with another episode about the role of hormones and its important interactions with the nervous system, and that will, of course, include both mechanisms and tools as well, and as always, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 333 ---
Video ID: rBdhqBGqiMc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rBdhqBGqiMc
Title: Reduce Anxiety & Stress with the Physiological Sigh | Huberman Lab Quantal Clip
Published: 2021-04-07 14:00:18 UTC
Description:
Here, I describe "Physiological Sighs," a pattern of breathing of two inhales followed by an extended exhale. This pattern of breathing occurs spontaneously in sleep when C02 levels get too high, but they can be done deliberately any time we want to reduce our levels of anxiety and calm down fast. Thank you for your interest in science!

#HubermanLab #Anxiety #Stress

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
X: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

The Huberman Lab podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: Arabic
"مقاطع كميّة" يعاني مليارات الأشخاص من التوتر، وهناك أدوات لمكافحة التوتر تتضمن أشياء مثل التأمل، وتمارين التنفس، والتغذية الجيدة، والعلاقات الاجتماعية الجيدة، وتجنّب كل الأشياء السيئة في الحياة. وعلى الرغم من أن هذه الأنشطة قوية، إلّا أن المشكلة هي أنها تتطلب من الأشخاص أن يبتعدوا عن النشاط المسبب للتوتر. على النقيض من ذلك، كان مختبري والمختبرات الأخرى مهتمة جدًا بتطوير الأدوات التي تسمح لنا بمقاومة التوتر. وبعبارة أخرى، الشعور بمزيد من الهدوء في الوقت الحالي، وهذا دون الحاجة إلى الانفصال عن النشاط المسبب للتوتر. أفضل طريقة أعرفها للقيام بذلك تُسمى التنهد الفسيولوجي. التنهد الفسيولوجي هو نمط من التنفس يتضمن شهيقين يتبعهما زفير ممتد. تم اكتشاف التنهدات الفسيولوجية في ثلاثينيات القرن العشرين، كنمط من التنفس الذي يمارسه الأشخاص بشكل عفوي عندما يكونون في بيئات خانقة أو في حالة نوم عميق، عندما يتراكم غاز يُسمى ثاني أكسيد الكربون في مجرى الدم. يحفّز ثاني أكسيد الكربون الرغبة في التنفس. هناك خلايا عصبية في الدماغ تعرف متى ترتفع مستويات ثاني أكسيد الكربون بشكل كبير. وعندما ترتفع المستويات أكثر من اللازم، فإنها تؤدي إلى الشهيق والزفير، أو الشهيق المزدوج والزفير. يمكنك الآن القيام بالتنهدات الفسيولوجية طواعية، في أيّ وقت تشعر فيه بالتوتر الشديد وتريد أن تشعر بمزيد من الهدوء. تفعلها هكذا. إنه شهيق مزدوج. وعادةً ما يكون الشهيق الأول أطول من الثاني، ولكن لا يزال من المهم القيام بالشهيق الثاني. وبعد ذلك زفير طويل وممتد. عادةً ما يتم إجراء كلا الشهيقين من خلال الأنف والزفير من خلال الفم. هذه هي الطريقة الأكثر فعالية للقيام بالتنهد الفسيولوجي. ومع ذلك، إذا كنت لا يمكنك التنفس من خلال أنفك أو فمك لأيّ سبب من الأسباب، قم بذلك من خلال فمك أو من خلال أنفك. الشهيق الثاني مهم جدًا لأن رئتيك ليستا مجرد كيسين كبيرين من الهواء. إنهما كيسان كبيران من الهواء بهما الكثير من الأكياس الصغيرة، ملايين الأكياس. وإذا كنت ستضع هذه الأكياس بجانب بعضها البعض، فإن حجمها سيكون بحجم ملعب تنس. ويسمح هذا باستنشاق المزيد من الأكسجين وكذلك تفريغ ثاني أكسيد الكربون. لذلك عندما تقوم بالشهيق المزدوج، فإنه يعيد نفخ أيّ من هذه الأكياس الصغيرة التي انهارت، وبذلك، يسمح لك بتفريغ المزيد من ثاني أكسيد الكربون. إذا كنت تشعر بالتوتر في أيّ ظرف من الظروف، استنشق مرتين من خلال الأنف ثم قم بالزفير لفترة طويلة من خلال الفم، إذا أردت، يمكنك تكرار ذلك مرة ثانية أو حتى ثالثة، ولكن عادةً، واحدة أو اثنتين وحسب، وربما ثلاث مرات من التنهدات كافية لخفض مستوى التوتر والتحفز لديك بسرعة كبيرة، وتسمح لك بالشعور بمزيد من الهدوء. "علم الأعصاب، بودكاست معمل هيوبرمان"

========================================

--- Video 334 ---
Video ID: J7SrAEacyf8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J7SrAEacyf8
Title: How Hormones Shape Sexual Development
Published: 2021-04-05 12:00:16 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I discuss how hormones such as testosterone and estrogen and their derivatives impact the early development of the brain and body and their maturation. I review published data on environmental factors shown to powerfully alter hormone pathways in animals and humans and the effects of cannabis, alcohol and cell phones on testes, sperm, ovaries and hormones. I describe the predictable relationship between genes, beard growth and balding patterns, and the importance of estrogen for brain development in people of all chromosomal sexes. Finally, I discuss how the hormones we are exposed to in the womb shape the relative length of our finger digits, the sounds our ears make (yes you read that correctly), and how those correlate with people's self-reports of their sexual preferences. As always, basic information and tools are discussed.

#HubermanLab #Testosterone #Estrogene

Thank you to our sponsors:
InsideTracker - https://insidetracker.com/huberman
Helix Sleep - https://helixsleep.com/huberman
Athletic Greens - https://athleticgreens.com/huberman

Our Patreon page:
https://www.patreon.com/andrewhuberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab

Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Join the Neural Network - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Links:
Mood Meter: https://moodmeterapp.com/ 
NSDR: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pL02HRFk2vo 
Cell Phones & Hormones: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22138021/ 
Finger Length Ratios & Hormones/Sexual Orientation: 
https://www.nature.com/articles/35006555 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2940503/ 
LeVay Study in Science Magazine on Sexual Orientation Brain Dimorphism: 
https://science.sciencemag.org/content/253/5023/1034

Timestamps below.
00:00:00 Introduction 
00:06:47 Announcement: Mood Meter App Works Again
00:08:00 Maximizing Learning from the Podcast
00:10:00 New Non-Sleep Deep Rest Protocol, Spanish Subtitles 
00:11:35 Sexual Differentiation: Hormones, Neurons & Behavior 
00:14:15 Hormones Basics 
00:15:26 Sperm Meets Egg, Chromosomal Sex, Gonadal Sex,  
00:17:50 Y Chromosome Inhibition of Feminization  
00:19:00 Placenta Is An Endocrine (Hormone-Producing) Organ, Adrenal Testosterone 
00:19:45 Hormonal Sex, Morphological Sex 
00:21:04 Hormones Fast & Slow, Sex Steroids Can Turn On Genes 
00:23:06 Masculinization, Feminization, Demasculinization, Defeminization 
00:23:42 Primary Sexual Characteristics: DHT Drives Penis Development  
00:27:03 Secondary Sexual Characteristics 
00:27:43 Penis Sprouting: Guevedoces  
00:31:25 Estrogen, NOT Testosterone, Masculinizes The Brain  
00:33:15 Breast Development In Males: Aromatase; Puberty, & Steroids in Athletes 
00:34:50 Estrogen Powerfully Controls Brain Development In All Individuals 
00:35:19 Avoiding Hormonal Disruption In Children & Adults: Specific Oils, Creams, Etc.  
00:39:00 Environmental Endocrine Disruptors, Sperm Count Decline, Vincloziline 
00:44:20 Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome: Hormones Need Receptors, SARMS
00:48:41 Estrogen Establishes “Masculine” Brain Circuits, Testosterone 
00:49:42 Cannabis, Alcohol: In Babies, Puberty & Adults 
00:56:25 Cell Phone Technology: Effects On Hormones, Ovaries, & Testicles 
01:02:33 Beards & Baldness Patterns Around the World, DHT, 5-alpha-reductase  
01:06:39 Creatine & DHT/Hair Loss  
01:08:20 Predicting Aging Rates By Pubertal Rates 
01:10:04 Hyenas, Baseball, & Hypertrophied Clitorises: Androstenedione 
01:14:26 Intersex Moles 
01:15:40 Marijuana Plants, Pollens: Plant-To-Animal “Warfare” 
01:20:08 Finger Length Ratios, Prenatal Hormone Exposure & Sexual Orientation 
01:29:13 Brain Dimorphisms with Sexual Orientation 
01:32:00 “Older Brother Effects”: Male Fetuses Might Change Mothers & Subsequent Brothers 
01:35:06 The Path Forward & A Warning
01:35:55 Support & Your Questions 

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

[Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac https://www.blabacphoto.com/]

Transcript Language: English (United States)
[upbeat music] - [Andrew Huberman] Welcome to The Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. - I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort, to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Inside Tracker. Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I'm a big believer in blood tests and DNA tests for the simple reason that many of the factors that are important for your short-term and long-term health and overall wellbeing can only be analyzed from blood and DNA tests. Things like metabolic factors and hormone levels, really can only be assessed accurately from blood and DNA. The thing I like about Inside Tracker is you don't just get back levels of different hormones and metabolic factors and so forth, you also get directives. It has a dashboard that's very easy to use that tells you based on your data, what sorts of foods you might want to eat more of or less of. What forms of exercise you might want to do more of or less of. It's really a wonderful way to assess how your behaviors and lifestyle choices are interacting with what's going on deep within your biology. Inside Tracker makes all of that super easy to understand. It's also really easy to get the blood tests and DNA tests taken. You can go to a local location or they can send somebody to your home if you prefer that. If you'd like to try Inside Tracker you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of Inside Trackers plans. Use the code Huberman at checkout. That's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any off any of Inside Tracker's plans and use the code Huberman at checkout. Today's episode is also brought to you by Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are designed to meet your sleep needs, in order to optimize your sleep. I've done several episodes of this podcast and there's a ton of information out there pointing to the fact that getting really deep restful sleep each night is vital for mental and physical health. And the mattress that you sleep on and the pillow that you use is very important for getting optimal sleep. Helix Sleep has a brief two minute quiz that you can take. It asks you questions like, "Do you sleep on your side, or your back or your stomach or maybe you don't know? Do you tend to run hot or cold as you sleep or maybe you don't know?" That two minute quiz matches you to a mattress and pillow that's ideal for your sleep needs. I took this quiz, I matched to the mattress they call "The Dusk," D-U-S-K. And I've been sleeping on "The Dusk" mattress for many months now and I've been sleeping better than I ever have before. It's really wonderful to have a really good night's sleep on a consistent basis. It's a total game changer. So if you're interested in upgrading your mattress, you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman. Take their two minutes sleep quiz and they'll match you to a customized mattress. And you'll get up to $200 off any of their mattress orders and two free pillows. So that's helixsleep.com/huberman. Take the two minutes sleep quiz they'll match you to a mattress. And if you order one of their mattresses, you'll get up to $200 off any of their mattresses and two free pillows. They have a 10 year warranty and you get to try out the mattress for 100 nights risk-free and if you don't like it they'll pick it up and take it away. If you love it, then you keep it. And I think there's a very good chance that you're going to love it, I certainly loved mine. And today's episode is also brought to you by Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I started using Athletic Greens way back in 2012. And so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. I started using Athletic Greens because I found it rather confusing to figure out what vitamins and minerals to take. And in Athletic Greens, I get all the vitamins and minerals I need to cover my bases. As well probiotics are really important. Probiotics have been shown now in numerous studies to be important for the gut microbiome, which impacts the gut brain axis, as well as various aspects of bodily health. So in Athletic Greens I get vitamins, minerals and probiotics. I also really like the way it tastes. It's a greens drink, so you mix it with some water. You could mix it with something else like juice if you like. I mix mine with water and lemon juice and I drink it once or twice a day. If you want to try Athletic Greens you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman. And if you do that, you'll claim their special offer, which is to get a years supply of vitamin D3 K2. There's now also a wealth of data showing that Vitamin D3 is important for various aspects of brain and body health. So that's athleticgreens.com/huberman for Athletic Greens and a years supply of Vitamin D3 K2. You'll also get five free travel packets. The travel packets are just a really convenient way to take Athletic Greens when you're on the road, in the car or on a plane or just moving around. You just empty one of the packets into a water bottle or a glass and mix it up really quickly. It saves any kind of mess or anything of that sort. So once again athleticgreens.com/huberman to get Vitamin D3 K2. That's a year supply and the five free travel packs. It's a new month, which means it's a new topic here at the Huberman Lab Podcast. For the next four or so episodes, we're going to be talking all about hormone affects on the brain and body. So that's a huge number of different topics. We're going to talk about sex. We're going to talk about reproduction. We're going to talk about puberty a little bit more. We talked about that in a previous episode. We're going to talk about menopause. We're going to talk about birth control. We are going to talk about aggression, competition, winning, losing. Basically, we're going to cover as much about hormones as we possibly can in this month and in doing so we are going to go deep into tools and protocols. We are also going to talk about a lot of tools that relate to things that you might not want to do in order to optimize hormone health, regardless of stage of life or your goals et cetera. So it's sure to be a month rich with discussion, rich with tools and you're going to learn a lot of neuroscience and endocrinology. There's actually a field of neuro-endocrinology. It's actually where I started my graduate work. I did a masters in it. Which has only to say that I love the topic. I have a lot of friends that work on this topic, many of whom I've consulted for these episodes. And I'm really excited to share the information with you. Before we dive into today's episode, "All About Emotions and Sex." I want to just to have a few announcements that are designed to point you to some useful resources. Last episode, "Talking About The Science of Emotions and Relationships." I mentioned the Mood Meter app. The Mood Meter App was developed by people out at Yale University who study the biology and psychology of emotions. It's a really wonderful app. However, many of you quickly told me that the Mood Meter App isn't available in your area. You went to the link we posted and it just was saying not available in your area. The situation was actually a lot worse than that. The situation was that, when we recorded the episode the Mood Meter App was working. I know 'cause I downloaded a fresh copy of it to my phone. And then in the ensuing weekend, they took the Mood Meter App down for some repairs. The Mood Meter app is now up. It is available. I want to be really clear. It's not an app I'm affiliated with. I'm just mentioning it to you. They don't know me. I know them, but they don't know me. So we don't have any kind of business relationship. They do charge 99 cents for the app. I think the free version has disappeared in the last year or so. So that's Mood Meter app. We'll provide the link again and the link should be working. Hopefully they won't take it down again, in between this announcement and the release of this episode. Also just want to take a step back for a moment and talk a little bit about the logic of how to make the most of the information on the Huberman Lab Podcast. I tend to throw out a lot of information about a given topic. Many of you have pointed out however, that I don't cover certain things. And once again I'll just say the goal is always to be accurate, but there's no way I can be exhaustive. There's no way I can cover everything for a particular topic. The good news is we have time. My goal, at least in the first year of the Huberman Lab Podcast, is to give you a basis, a foundation in these different topics of neuro-plasticity, focus, sleep, hormones et cetera. And of course, to provide tools along the way. We are going to host guests, I've actually started recording with some of these guests already. And even those episodes will include a little what we call primer. A little description of the basics of a given topic so that you can get more information from those topics. My goal really is to educate you in these topics, give you a foundation in these topics and allow you to start exploring them here in the episodes with our future guests, but also in other podcasts and books and other sources of information. So for those of you that are saying, "It's too much information." I just encourage you to remind yourself that you have a pause button you can return to it. Everything's timestamped. For those of you that feel, it's not enough information I'm not covering enough. Just know that this is just the beginning. We didn't intend to do this for a very long time and we will be thorough over time. So thanks for your patience and please be patient with yourselves. There's no reason why you have to digest all the information in one swoop. The other thing is that I've been told both that I speak too fast and speak too slow. So there's a wonderful solution to this. If I speak too fast or too slow you can adjust the speed in YouTube. If you're listening in a different format, I think you also can adjust the speed of playback. So that's something that wouldn't be possible in the classroom, but you may find useful. And then last but not least, I want to point people again to this NSDR, non-sleep deep rest protocol, that the folks over at Madefor have put out as a free resource. It does, as many of you pointed out, bear resemblance to things like yoga nidra and other forms of meditation. But what we've done is we've stripped out intentions or any kind of the verbiage related to what some people might perceive as kind of related to the yoga community or specific to kind of new age-y type techniques. Not because we don't like yoga nidra. In fact, I've done yoga nidra daily for almost the last goodness, eight years of my life. I love yoga nidra, but sometimes the complicated language can be a separator and can discourage people from taking on these protocols that are extremely useful. So NSDR is intentionally generic. It's designed to bring you into a state of deep relaxation through a combination of breathing and body scan. There's the you too script over at Madefor which is linked in the caption. And many people find that they prefer that to scripts like yoga nidra. Scripts where they're doing intentions and they're hearing a lot of kind of unusual language around the process. This is just very basic and I hope you'll enjoy it. And if you prefer the more typical yoga nidra scripts then go with those. There are many of them available on the internet and elsewhere. And last but not least I want to point out that, all our episodes now are subtitled both in English and in Spanish. So for those of you that prefer to digest this information in Spanish, that's now available to you in the subtitles. Today we're going to talk about The Science of Sex. In particular, sexual differentiation. Now that's a complicated topic because sex is both a adjective, a noun and a verb, depending on the context. Today we're going to talk about the hormonal effects and the neural effects of particular events that happen during development and how those guide adolescent and adult behavior, including sexual preference. It's an area that's fascinating and for which, there are actually very solid textbook findings. So textbook findings means, that there are many studies that have been aggregated over decades. That point to what we now know to be absolute truths in terms of how hormones affect brain development, how the brain impacts hormonal development and how those interact to control behavior for instance. We are also going to talk about reproduction, the verb sex. And of course, sex the verb, can also be carried out independent of reproduction. It's not always, in particular in humans, just to produce offspring. So that's going to be covered in the next episode, but you absolutely need to understand the information in this episode, in order to make sense of the information in the next episode. So, today we're going to explore hormones. What they are, how they work, what leads to masculinization or feminization of the brain and body? I'll just throw out one really interesting fact that perhaps most of you didn't realize that hormones have direct effects on the body. Most people know that because there are hormone differences and sex differences in bodies in terms of genitalia and body hair, distribution of body hair et cetera. But there are also effects of hormones on the brain directly and believe it or not there're also effects on the spinal cord. On the neurons and structures within the spinal cord that impact in a very direct way, what sorts of behaviors are possible. So it's a fascinating area, you might notice I'm going to go a little bit more slowly through this topic than I normally do. I want to be extremely careful with my language. Some of these topics, some of you may be thinking are extremely sensitive, right? And of course, any discussion about sex and reproduction is a sensitive one. But today we're just talking about the biology. We're not getting into the cultural constraints or the cultural dialogue. What we're trying to do today is really get to the biology, the physiology, the endocrinology and the behavior. So let's start by talking about what hormones are just to remind you and what they do. Hormones by definition, are a substance, a chemical that's released in one area of the body. Typically from something we call a gland, although they can also be released from neurons. But they're released often from glands, that travel and have effects both on that gland but also on other organs and tissues in the body. And that differentiates hormones from things like neurotransmitters, which tend to act more locally. So that's important. A hormone is a substance secreted at one location in the body, travels, and has impact on things elsewhere in the body. Examples of tissues that produce hormones would be the thyroid, the testes, the ovaries et cetera. And then of course there are areas of the brain like the hypothalamus and the pituitary, which are closely related to one another and release hormones that cause the release of yet other hormones out in the body. So we're going to cover all this. If you don't know anything about endocrinology, you're still going to be able to understand today's discussion. And we're going to start with a discussion about, what hormones actually do, to create this thing that we call masculinization or feminization. So let's start with development. Sperm meets egg. Everything that happens before that is a topic of the next episode. But, sperm meets egg. This is mammalian reproduction. And that egg starts to duplicate, it starts to make more of itself. It makes more cells. And eventually some of those cells become skin. Some of those cells become brain. Some of those cells become muscle. Some of those cells become fingers. All the stuff that makes up the brain and body plan. In addition, there are hormones that come both from the mother and from the developing baby, the developing fetus. That impact. whether or not the brain will be what they call organized masculine or organized feminine. And as I say this, I want you to try and discard with the cultural connotations or your psychological connotations, of what masculinization and feminization are. Because we're only centering on the biology. So typically, people have either two X chromosomes, and the traditional language around that is that person is female, right? Or an X chromosome and a Y chromosome and that person will become male. Now it's not always the case. There are cases where it's XXY, where there two X chromosomes plus a Y chromosome. There are also cases where it's XYY. Where they're two Y chromosomes. and these have important biological and psychological impacts. So the first thing we need to establish is that there is something called chromosomal sex. Whether or not they're two X chromosomes, or an X and Y chromosome, is what we call chromosomal sex. But the next stage of separating out the sexes, is what we call gonadal sex. Typically not always, but typically if somebody has testes for their gonads, we think of them as male. And if somebody has ovaries, we think of them as female. Although that's not always the case either. But let's just explore the transition from chromosomal sex to gonadal sex, because it's a fascinating one that we all went through in some form or another. So this XY that we typically think of as promoting masculinization of the fetus. We say that because on the Y chromosome there are genes and those genes have particular functions that suppress female reproductive organs. So on the Y chromosome there's a gene, which encodes for something called Mullerian Inhibiting Hormone. So there's actually a hormone that's programmed by the Y chromosome that inhibits the formation of Mullerian Ducts, which are an important part of the female reproductive apparatus. That's critical because, already we're seeing the transition between chromosome Y chromosome and gonad. And other genes on the Y chromosome promote the formation of testes. So there are genes like the SRY gene and other genes that promote the formation of testes, while they also inhibit the formation of the Mullerian Ducts. So the transition from chromosomal sex to gonadal sex is a very important distinction. It's kind of a fork in the road that happens very early in development while fetuses are still in the embryo. Now what's interesting as well, is that just because there's a Y chromosome that can suppress Mullerian Duct formation and there are other genes on the Y chromosome that promote testes development. The placenta itself is an endocrine organ. I think most people don't know this but the placenta is an endocrine organ as well. The mother, which of course is carrying the fetus has an adrenal gland which can produce testosterone. There are instances for example, where a mother has either a tumor or for some other reason is secreting large levels of testosterone while carrying a fetus that is XX. And that leads to what we would call masculinization of certain aspects of the fetus. Typically, that will be enlarged clitoris. There also some examples of other phenotypes on the body that are created even though it's a purely XX chromosomal baby. So we have to distinguish between chromosomal sex, gonadal sex. And then there's what we call hormonal sex. Which is the effects of the steroid hormones, estrogen and testosterone and their derivatives, on what we call morphological sex or the shape of the baby and the human and the genitalia and the jaw and all these other things. And so it actually is quite complicated. So you know, it's a long distance from chromosomes to gender identity and gender identity has a lot of social influences and roles. This is an area that right now is very dynamic and in the discussion out there as you know. But just getting from chromosomal sex to what we would call gonadal sex and hormonal sex and morphological sex, involves a number of steps. So today we're going to talk about those steps. And there's some fascinating things that do indeed relate to tools. Do indeed relate to some important behavioral choices. Important choices about things to avoid while pregnant. And for those of you that are not pregnant, things to avoid if you're thinking about eventually having children. And that is not to drive development in one direction or another, but there are examples where there are some deleterious things in our environment that can actually negatively impact what we call sexual development overall, regardless of chromosomal background. So let's get started with that. Let's talk a little bit more about what hormones do. Hormones generally have two categories of effects. They can either be very fast or they can be very slow. There are hormones like cortisol and adrenaline, which act very fast. Adrenaline can increase your heart rate very fast when secreted into the body. Cortisol can be a little bit slower, but it also can have some very fast effects. And then there are hormones like. Like testosterone and estrogen, which we refer to as the sex steroid hormones. The sex steroid hormones can have quick effects through signaling. Meaning they can attach to cells and make those cells do different things. They can have a actually quite quick effects on the brain. A lot of people don't know this, but there are some very fast effects of estrogen and testosterone as well as long-term effects. These molecules, for those of you that are interested, are what it called lipophilic. Which just means that they like fatty stuff, they can actually pass through fatty membranes. And because the outside of cells, as well as the what's called the nuclear envelope. Where all the DNA contents and stuff are stuffed inside, are made of lipid, of fat. These steroid hormones can actually travel into cells and then get into the DNA. Basically interact with the DNA of cells in order to control gene expression. So they can change the sorts of things that cells will become and they can change the way that cells function in a long-term way. And that's actually how the presence of these genes like SRY and Mullerian inhibiting hormone, lead to reductions or elimination I should say, of things like the Mullerian Ducts and promote instead what's called in males the Wolffian Ducts. Or promote the development of testes rather than ovaries. So all you need to know is that hormones have short-term and long-term effects. And the long-term effects are actually related to their effects on genes and how those genes are expressed or repressed, in order to prevent them from having particular proteins made. So these hormones, these steroid hormones are exceedingly powerful. And if we're going to have a discussion about masculinization or feminization et cetera, you also need to think about the counterpart. It's not just about masculinizing the body or feminizing the body and brain, it's also about demasculinize the brain in many cases, as a normal biological function of typically of XX females. And de feminization, the suppression of certain pathways that are related to feminization of the body and brain. But there are some really fascinating twists in this story. So I've just thrown a lot of biology at you, but this is where it all starts to get incredibly surprising. You would think that it's straightforward, right? You have a Y chromosome you suppress the female reproductive pathway like the Mullerian Ducts. You promote the development of testes and then testes make testosterone. And then it organizes the brain male and it wants to do male like things. And then in females you get estrogen and it wants to do female like things. And air quotes here for all of this. It turns out that isn't how it works at all. Here's where it's interesting. We have to understand that there are effects of these hormones, testosterone and estrogen. on what are called primary sexual characteristics. Which are the ones that you're born with. Secondary sexual characteristics, which are the ones that show up in puberty. And these are happening in the brain and body and spinal cord. And so I'm going to disentangle all this for you by giving you some examples. First, let's talk about the development of primary sexual characteristics. The ones that show up at birth. And one of the more dramatic examples of this comes from the role of testosterone in creating the external genitalia. Now you might think it's just straight forward. If there's a testes, 'cause there's a Y chromosome. You know, you've got a gene that codes for the development of testes, you get testosterone and the penis grows and the baby is born with a penis. You know, one of the first things that happens when the baby comes out is they look at the genitalia, and they try and make an assessment on whether or not it's a quote boy or it's a quote girl, right? That's been done for a very very long time throughout human history. It turns out that it's not testosterone that's responsible for the development of the penis in a baby that has an X chromosome and a Y chromosome. It's a different androgen. Androgen is just a category of hormones that includes testosterone, but testosterone is converted in the fetus to something called dihydrotestosterone. And that's accomplished through an enzyme called 5-alpha-reductase. Now dihydrotestosterone has important effects later in life too. We will talk about those. In fact, if you just want to know, dihydrotestosterone is what we would call the dominant androgen in males. It's responsible for aggression. It's responsible for a lot of muscular strength. It's involved in beard growth and male pattern baldness. We're going to talk about all of that. But dihydrotestosterone has powerful effects in determining the genitalia, while the baby is still in the embryo. So this ends. There's testosterone that's made. And that testosterone gets converted by this enzyme 5-alpha-reductase in a little structure called the tubercle. That tubercle will eventually become the penis. So you say, "Okay, straight forward." This testosterone is converted to dihydrotestosterone. And then if there's dihydrotestosterone it controls penis growth. And indeed that's the case. So that's a primary sexual characteristic. That baby will then grow up and later during puberty there will be the release of a molecule. I talked about this last episode called Kisspeptin. K-I-S-S-P-E-P-T-I-N kisspeptin, which will cause the release of some other hormones Connatural releasing hormone, Luteinizing hormone will stimulate the testes to make testosterone. So in puberty, testosterone leads to further growth and development of the penis, as well as the accumulation of or growth of pubic hair, a deepening of the voice, all the secondary sexual characteristics, okay? So dihydrotestosterone creates what we would call the typical masculine phenotype for primary sexual characteristics and produces. Testosterone excuse me, produces secondary sexual characteristics during puberty. There's a very interesting phenomenon that was published in The Journal of Science in the 1970s, for which now there's a wealth of scientific data. And this relates to a genetic mutation, where 5-alpha-reductase the enzyme that converts testosterone to dihydrotestosterone doesn't exist. It's mutated in a way into a genome that it doesn't exist. And this actually was first identified in the Dominican Republic. It has shown up elsewhere. It's quite rare, but where it shows up it's robust. What happens is baby is born. Typically when a baby is born they don't measure chromosomes. They don't look at chromosomal sex XX or XY. That's not typically done nowadays. Baby is born. If you were to look at that baby, it would look female. There would be very little or no external penis. And so people would say, "It's a girl." And they might, you know, have the celebration it's a girl. And I guess now they call them "Gender Reveal Parties" or something like that. I don't know about this, but anyway. They would reveal. The baby would reveal its external genitalia simply by being there and being naked when it's born. It has nothing to do with gender, it has to do with genitalia and sex. That baby would be born. And what was observed is that, from time to time, that baby after being raised as a girl, perfectly happy as a girl would around the age of 11 or 12 or 13, would suddenly start to sprout a penis. There's actually a name for this, it's called Guevedoces. Which the translation is more or less, penis at 12. And as strange as this might sound, it makes sense if you understand the underlying mutation. What happens in these children, these Guevedoces, is that the child is born. It has testes which are not descended, so up in the body. They're not making a lot of testosterone early on. They weren't able to convert testosterone to dihydrotestosterone because they lack this enzyme 5-alpha-reductase. As a consequence, the primary sexual characteristic of external male genitalia, penis, doesn't develop. And then what happens is the baby grows up as a young child essentially is treated as a girl. Generally they report being pretty comfortable as girls, although not always. And then testosterone starts getting secreted from the testes 'cause kisspeptin in the brain signals through gonadotropin and luteinizing hormone and travels down to the testes, the testes start churning out testosterone and there's a secondary growth of the penis. And all of a sudden there's a penis. And this leads to some very complicated situations in families and culturally. And actually the outcomes in terms of whether or not these children decide to self identify as males or females and how people treat them actually varies quite a lot. There's actually been kind of an adopting of a third category of sex and gender in these Guevedoces for in order to just offer them the opportunity to explore not just what would be a typical kind of girl or woman or boy or man phenotype, but something in between. Something that some people call intersex although intersex and pseudo hermaphroditism is actually a separate thing altogether. So it's fascinating and the point here is that dihydrotestosterone not testosterone is responsible for this primary growth of the penis. And that testosterone later is involved in the secondary sexual characteristics deepening in the voice, et cetera. Now this is where the information gets even more interesting and applies to essentially everybody. You might think that testosterone because it masculinizes the body in the secondary sexual characteristic way. And because dihydrotestosterone another androgen, masculinizes the primary sexual characteristics. The growth of the penis early on, that testosterone must masculinize the brain. And there are in fact aspects of masculinization of the brain and body, that are independent of genitalia. Now it might be obvious to some of you, but some people probably don't realize that. Yes indeed the brain has receptors for testosterone. It also has receptors for estrogen. But the fascinating thing is that if you look at the brains of people that have Y chromosomes and that have testes and that make testosterone, and you look at the brains of people that don't have Y chromosomes or testes and therefore make far less testosterone in general, what you realize is that the cells in the brain that differ between what I'll call males and females, but between XY, and XX have receptors for testosterone, but the masculinization of the brain is not accomplished by testosterone. I want to repeat this. The masculinization of the brain is not accomplished by testosterone. It is accomplished by estrogen. Testosterone can be converted into estrogen by an enzyme called aromatase. This is vitally important to understand. Testosterone can be converted into estrogen by something called aromatase. I'll give an example of where this happens later in life, to just illustrate the principle and really embed it in your mind. During puberty in boys, XY chromosome individuals. It's not uncommon for there to be transient or sometimes long lasting breast bud development. Testosterone goes up during puberty, for the reasons we talked about before. And some of that testosterone gets converted into estrogen by an enzyme called aromatase. Aromatase is made by several sources in the body. One of the main sources is body fat. So it can make a lot of aromatase. Sometimes you'll even see fairly dramatic breast development in males during puberty. Sometimes it's transient, sometimes it's not. The other place where you see this is in athletes and bodybuilders that take a lot of anabolic steroids. That take high levels of androgens. So they'll be taking testosterone at super physiological doses. Sometimes not always. They will convert some of that testosterone into estrogen and they'll get what's called gynecomastia. Which is the development of male breast tissue. Sometimes they'll get it cut out surgically. Other times they'll start trying to take estrogen blockers in order to try and suppress it or they'll try and block prolactin. It's a topic that we're going to get into in more detail. But what's important here is to understand that testosterone can be converted to estrogen by aromatase. Aromatase is not just made in body fat. There are neurons in the brain that make aromatase and convert testosterone into estrogen. And it is testosterone converted into estrogen. In other words, it's estrogen that masculinizes XY individual. That masculinizes the brain. And this has profound effects on all sorts of things. On behavior, on outlook in the world et cetera. But I think most people don't realize that it's estrogen that comes from testosterone that masculinizes the male brain, the XY brain. Not testosterone nor dihydrotestosterone. So I just want to mention some tools. You might be asking yourself, "How could tools possibly come up at this stage of the conversation where we're talking about sexual development and we're talking about the differentiation of tissues in the body." Well, this is true both for children and parents and adults. I want to emphasize that there are things that are environmental and there are things that people use in their homes sometimes that actually can impact hormone levels and can impact sexual development in fairly profound ways. And I want to be very clear, this is not me pulling from some rare journal have never heard of it. This is pulling from textbooks. In particular, today I'm guiding a lot of the conversation on work that on "Behavioral Endocrinology," is a book by Randy Nelson and Lance Kriegsfeld. True experts in the field. I'm going to talk about some of the work from Tyrone Hayes from UC Berkeley about environmental toxins and their impacts on some of these things like testosterone and estrogen. I'm going to touch into them. I'm going to give some anecdotal evidence that's grounded in studies, which we will provide in the caption or that I'll reference here. One of those that's actually really interesting but helps illustrate the principle that we've been talking about is. A few years ago, there was a lot of excitement about Evening Primrose Oil. Evening Primrose Oil is in a lot of products that typically are associated with skin beauty and skin health. And so I'm generalizing here. But typically it was mothers or sisters that were using it. And there were actually examples starting to crop up of young boys getting accelerated breast bud development from skin contact with women were using Evening Primrose Oil. So Evening Primrose Oil is chemically a lot like estrogen and it has a lot of estrogenic compounds. There are a number of things out there like this. So believe it or not things like pine pollen look very much like testosterone structurally. They are more or less are testosterone. Their bioavailability in humans isn't as clear. Evening Primrose Oil has a lot of estrogenic elements to it. Just structurally how it's built. And so there were cases where boys were understandably you know, being hugged by their mom or maybe even like showering and taking. you know using the Evening Primrose Oil solution. Those things will actually change levels of estrogens in boys and girls. And so this wasn't just an issue for young boys. This is also an issue for young girls. So it's not that Evening Primrose Oil is bad, it's just that many of you have probably heard about the dangers of Soy Isoflavones and things like that. The impact of soy on estrogen levels is, there are some decent evidence to support that. However, there's a lot of other factors that are more severe. And one of those is this Evening Primrose Oil. So regardless of age, let's just put it this way because people might be wanting to drive their hormones more estrogenic or more androgenic. How could I know which what your preference is? I don't know. But in any case, things like pre Evening Primrose Oil can actually promote estrogenic pathways in the body and some of it can go transdermal. Likewise, because testosterone replacement therapy is fairly widespread nowadays. And some people accomplish that through cream. It's pretty well understood that, if someone's taking that they want to avoid contact with anyone. Skin contact with anyone that is trying to promote more estrogenic activity in their body. And especially in children. So that's one. The other is this issue of environmental factors. Now this, you know, again I'm just going to highlight, when one starts talking about environmental factors and how they're poisoning us or disrupting growth or fertility rates it can start to sound a little bit crazy. Except when you start to actually look at some of the real data, Data from quality research labs funded by Federal government funded, not from companies or other sources, that are really aimed at understanding what the underlying biology is. And for that I really, we should all be grateful to Tyrone Hayes at UC Berkeley. I remember way back when I was a graduate student in the late nineties, goodness. at UC Berkeley. And I remember him, he was studying frogs. He was talking about developmental defects in these frogs that live in different waters around it was California, but also elsewhere. And he identified a substance, which is present in a lot of waterways throughout this country and other countries. So US and beyond. Certainly not just restricted to California, which is atrazine. This is A-T-R-A-Z-I-N-E. Again, this is the stuff of textbooks. And it causes severe testicular malformations. So again, atrazine exposure is serious. And what's interesting is if you look at the data, what you find is that at sites in Western and Midwestern sections of the United States 10 to 92% of male frogs. These were frogs mind you, had testicular abnormalities. And the most severe testicular malformations were in the testes rather than in the sperm. So it's actually the organ itself, the gonad itself. Now it's very well known now that atrazine is in many herbicides. And so you know, whereas I would say in the 80's and 90's the discussion around herbicides and their negative effects was considered kind of like hippy-dippy stuff or the stuff you hear about at you know, your local community markets and these kind of new age communities. Now there's very solid data, from Federally funded labs at major universities that have been peer reviewed and published in excellent journals, showing that indeed many of these herbicides can have negative effects, primarily by impacting the ratios of these hormones in either the mothers or in the testes, altering the testes of the fathers or direct effects on developing young animals and potentially humans. And so you ask, "Well, what about humans? Frogs are wonderful, but what about humans?" So here are the data on what's happening and this isn't all going to be scary stuff. We're also going to talk about tools to ameliorate and offset some of these effects. One would be, be cautious with Evening Primrose as well as testosterone creams, depending on whether or not you want to be more androgenic or estrogenic depending on your needs. But across human populations, sperm counts are indeed declining, okay? So in 1940, the average, the average density of human sperm was 113 million per milliliter of semen. That's how it's measured. How many sperm per milliliter of semen. In 1990 this figure has dropped to 66. So it went from 113 million per milliliter to 66 million per milliliter in the United States and Western Europe. So this is not just a US thing. Researchers also estimated that the volume of semen produced by men has dropped 20% in that time, reduced sperm count per generation even further. So between 1981 and 1991, the ratio of normal spermatogenesis has decreased from 56.4% to 26.9%. So there's a lot that's happening primarily because of these herbicides that are in widespread use to reduce sperm counts. And these are going to have profound effects not just on sperm counts, but on development, sexual development at the level of the gonads and the brain. Because you need testosterone to get dihydrotestosterone for primary sexual characteristics. You need estrogen that's come from testosterone to masculinize the brain. And of course, we're not just focusing on sperm and testosterone. You of course also know that many of these herbicides are disrupting estrogens in a similar way. Or are leading to hyper estrogenic, excuse me, states which might explain why puberty is happening so much earlier in young girls these days. So there are a lot of things that are happening. Now does this mean that you have to run around and neurotically avoid anything that includes things like atrazine and should you be avoiding all kinds of herbicides? I don't know that's up to you. But it does seem that these have pretty marked effects, in both the animal studies and in the human studies. You know, you can open up a textbook like the endocrinology textbook and find things like Vinclozolin. V-I-N-C-L-O-Z-O-L-I-N, which is a fungicide and it's an anti-androgen. You give it to animals, to rats. And instead of forming a penis, they don't form a penis. They basically, it's not that they form a clitoris, they just don't form a penis. So let's talk about female sexual development. And as always what we'll do is, we'll talk about the normal biology. Then we'll talk a little bit about a kind of extraordinary or unusual set of cases, but we'll talk about them because they illustrate an important principle about how things work under typical circumstances. So there is a mutation called androgen insensitivity syndrome. And understanding how androgen insensitivity syndrome works can help you really understand how hormones impact sexual development. So here's how it works. There are individuals who are XY, so they have a Y chromosome, that are born that make testosterone. They have testes and they don't have Mullerian Ducts because on the Y chromosome is this Mullerian inhibiting hormone. However, these individuals look completely female. And in general, they report feeling like girls when they're young, women when they're older. But there's something unusual that's happening in these individuals because they have an XY chromosomal type and not XX. So what's happening? Well what's happening is the testes are making testosterone, but the receptor for testosterone is mutated. And therefore the testes never descend. They don't have ovaries, they have testes but the testes are internal. And so typically these individuals find out that they are actually XY chromosomes. so that you know, their chromosomal sex is male. If you will. And their gonadal sex is male, but the gonads, the testes are inside the body. They don't actually develop a scrotum. They don't make ovaries. And when they don't menstruate around the time of puberty that's a sign that something is different. And so they never menstruate around puberty. And if they look into this deeply enough, what you find is that they are actually XY. They make testosterone but their body can't make use of the testosterone because they don't have the receptors. And the receptors are vitally important for some, for most all of the secondary sexual characteristics that we talked about. Body hair, penis growth during puberty et cetera. They live fairly happy lives as females. Although of course they can't conceive, right? They don't have a uterus, they don't have ovaries. They also in general, don't produce sperm in quantities enough that they could actually reproduce with somebody else, although sometimes they can. And believe it or not, and I'm not going to name names but there are actually reports of several people, fairly prominent people throughout history who have had this androgen insensitivity syndrome or people suspected they did. And the reason to not name names is that, it gets right to the heart of whether or not they are male or female. How could you say right? They have XY chromosomes but gonadally they have testes that are inside. And yet, if you looked at their bodies if you looked at their faces, you would say almost with certainty that they appeared female. And that naturally occurring experiment, points to the fact that testosterone that shows up in the body and impacts the things that the levels of the receptor has a profound effect on phenotype. On the external or body plan. So again, we're talking about this in order to illustrate the principle that in order to have its effects, a hormone doesn't just have to be present. That hormone actually has to be able to bind its receptor and take action on the target cells. And once again, I'll just throw out the example of where people are using performance enhancing drugs. Although that's a pretty broad statement, nowadays there's a lot of excitement about the so-called SARMs. Who are more on the receptor side. And so we'll talk about this in a future episode. And I just say that as a teaser because the SARMs and what's happening right now in augmenting sports performance, both with testosterone directly but also testosterone derivatives and then also altering things at the level of the receptor is exceedingly interesting and is revealing to us the many ways in which hormones can impact brain and body. In ways that we didn't suspect. Perhaps the simplest way to understand how estrogen and testosterone impact masculinization or feminization of the brain and behavior is from a statement. It's actually the closing sentence of an abstract that my colleague Neuronal Shaw at Stanford school of medicine published. Which is that estrogen, again it's estrogen that is aromatized from testosterone by aromatase, sets up the masculine repertoire of sexual, and in animals and in humans, territorial behaviors. So it sets up the circuitry in the brain. Estrogen does that. Estrogen sets up the masculine circuitry in the brain and testosterone is then what controls the display of those behaviors later in life. And I find that incredibly interesting. You would think it was just testosterone did one thing and estrogen did another, but it turns out that nature is far more interesting than that. Okay, so what are some things that impact sexual development early in life and later in life. Let's talk about cannabis. Let's talk about alcohol and dare I say let's talk about cell phones. Something that I never thought I would ever do, either in this podcast or in the classroom. But, these days there are really interesting data. And I think you should be aware of them. First of all, cannabis, marijuana, THC. I realize that there are now a lot of different variance it's on this. There are a lot of different strains of cannabis. I personally am not a pot smoker. It's just not for me. I'm not talking about the moral or legal implications, in some States it's decriminalized, in other places it's really illegal and other places it's basically legal. You have to check, you know where you live and understand the laws. That's not what this is about. What we do know however, is that with the exception of one study there are many studies that point to the fact that THC and other things in cannabis promote significant increases in aromatase activity. Now pot smokers aren't going to like this, especially male pot smokers aren't going to like this but it's the reality. Remember, what you're hearing in the background is Costello snoring really loud? Should we put them on screen? He's not a cannabis smoker, but you can imagine why. Come here Costello. Come here buddy, come here. He's asleep. Come here. He's my [indistinct], there you go. This dog definitely does not need cannabis. This is his state for most of the time. He is highly... Oh he's asleep still. So some of you have asked to see Costello if you're just listening on audio, maybe he'll gives a [Costello grunts] Oh, okay. We're going to let him get back to sleep. He's always here, some of you have asked to see him. Costello's not a pot smoker either. He did have a dog sitter that was a pot smoker years ago. It was his favorite dog sitter but, I'm not a pot smoker. Again, no judgment. But here's the deal. That cannabis, and it's not clear if it's THC itself or other elements in the marijuana plant, promote aromatase activity. Now, this has been observed anecdotally where pot smokers have a higher incidence of developing something I mentioned before gynecomastia, breast bud development. Or full-blown breast development in males. There may be some women who want to increase their estrogenic activity. Remember females make testosterone. It comes from the adrenals, right? They don't have testes. So it comes from the adrenals and that testosterone can also be aromatized. Although typically most of the aromatase activity that we're referring to in these examples is in males. So testosterone can increase estrogenic activity. So you might say, "Oh you know, therefore does testosterone reduce sexual behavior? Does it create all sorts of things that are related to low testosterone?" Not necessarily, not necessarily. And here's why, estrogen itself in males and females is important for things like libido and sexual behavior. I'm going to repeat that. If estrogen is too low in males, it can actually inhibit libido and sexual behavior. So you don't want estrogen too high or too low. Whether or not you're male or female. Now of course in females, estrogen levels tend to be higher than in males. I'm speaking very generally here. You just think back to the chromosomal sex. That's what I'm referring to when I say male or female, although there's nuance there of course. In females, the testosterone that comes from the adrenals has a powerful effect on libido and desire to reproduce. And in the next episode, we're going to talk about how that works and its relationship to birth control, its relationship to menopause. We're also going to talk about how that whole thing works in males as well. But cannabis and other aspects of the marijuana plant can impact levels of testosterone and estrogen by increasing aromatase. And so people should be aware of that. As well, there are good data. I was able to find several studies on PubMed, pointing to the fact that smoking marijuana during pregnancy can shift the pattern of hormones in the developing fetus, such that it promotes more estrogenic outcomes. Now earlier I said that estrogen is what masculinized is the male brain, in utero that's true, but the way that cannabis seems to work, at least from the studies I was able to identify is that it promotes circulating estrogen in the body and therefore can counteract some of the masculinizing effects of things like testosterone and dihydrotestosterone, on primary and secondary sexual characteristics. So I mention this because, you know I think nowadays marijuana use is far more widespread and certainly during puberty it can have profound effects on these hormonal systems. And so we'll do another episode, that goes really deep into this. But yes, cannabis promotes estrogenic activity by increasing aromatase. Almost everyone can appreciate that drinking during pregnancy, is not good for the developing fetus. Fetal alcohol syndrome is a well-established negative outcome of pregnancy. And it's something that there are cognitive effects that are really bad. There's actually physical malformation, et cetera. So drinking during pregnancy, not good. Probably drinking during puberty, not good either. Because alcohol, in particular certain things like beer but other grain alcohols can increase estrogenic activity. Now, this isn't just about protecting young boys from estrogenic activity. It's also protecting girls from excessive or even hypo estrogenic effects of alcohol in puberty. Now, many teenagers drink. College students drink and it's important to point out that puberty doesn't start on one day and end on another day, puberty has a beginning a middle and an end, but development is really our entire lifespan. This idea that you know, puberty you know has this open and close. That's just false. Okay, so we talked about cannabis. We talked about alcohol. Let's talk about cell phones. First of all, I use a cell phone. I use it very often. And I do not think they are evil devices. I think that they require some discipline in order to make sure that it does not become a negative force in one's life. So I personally restrict the number of hours that I'm on the phone and in particular on social media. I only answer email at particular times of day. But what about the cell phone itself? You know, when I was a junior professor. I was a pre-tenure early professor. I taught this class on neural circuits in health and disease. And one of the students asked me, you know are cell phones safe for the brain? And you know, all the data point to the fact that they were. Or at least there were no data showing that it wasn't. I still don't have the answer on that, frankly. I don't see a lot of studies about it. I'm not personally aware of any evidence in quality peer reviewed studies showing that cell phones are bad for the brain or that holding the phone to the ear is bad or that Bluetooth is bad or any of that. I'm just not aware of any quality studies. If you are aware of quality studies, peer reviewed study please reference them, put them in the comment section. Send them to me, however you like. I'd love to see them. I'm not aware of them. However, I was very interested in a particular study that was published back in 2013 on rats. It was basically took a cell phone and put it under a cage of rats and looked at basically testicular and ovarian development in rats and saw minor but still statistically significant defects in ovarian and testicular development. Since then and now returning to the literature, I've seen a absolute explosion of studies. Some of which are in quality journals, some of which are in what I would call not to blue ribbon journals. Identifying defects in testicular and or ovarian development by mere exposure to cell phone emitted waves. Let's just call that, we don't know what they are. And this sounds almost crazy, right? Anytime somebody starts talking about EMS and things like that, you kind of worry like, is this person okay? But look, the literature are pointing in a direction where chronic exposure of the gonads to cell phones could be creating serious issues in terms of the health at the cellular level and then in terms of the output. So the output for the testes would be sperm production. Swimming speed in sperm is an important feature of sperm health. In the ovaries it would be estrogenic output. How regular the cycles are. So in animals, the cycles are a little bit different than in humans. They don't have a menstrual cycle. They have an estrous cycle, which is a generally around four days. I think that it's to say based on the literature, that there are effects of cell phone emitted waves on gonadal development. The question is, what is the proximity of the cell phone to the gonads? Now, I've taken the literature as I observe it. And that of course we'll point you to in the captions. And I don't like to have my cell phone on and in my pocket, I'm well past puberty, but nonetheless some of these effects were seen in adult animals. There are effects now that have been demonstrated in humans. So let's just talk about a couple of those effects. So a paper published in the journal, "Clinical Biochemistry" from S. Gander et al. Looked at hormone profiles in people based on proximity to their phone and frequency of phone use, where they stored their phone on their body. Aa well as proximity of where they lived to, I guess they're called these radio-frequency towers. So the base stations. And they were looking at effects of radio frequency radiation RFR on human hormone profiles. And they show significant decreases in cortisol. You might say, "Well, that might be good." But you need that morning cortisol bump in order to wake up. Morning cortisol is good. But also thyroid hormones were significantly reduced. Prolactin in young females, that's definitely concerning and testosterone levels in males and females. And so, there are now quite good data showing that being close to the phone too much of the day and how close is an interesting question or living near one of these base stations apparently can have effects on hormone profiles. And when you see a study like this one should always ask, "Well, what are the other things that could also have effects on these hormone profiles?" Right? Cause you could imagine that if you ran the same study of people that live close to a waterway, or close to a highway where there's a lot of exhaust from buses and cars, you might see similar effects. So you have to take these sorts of studies with a grain of salt. But I think it's very interesting. And given that the last time I looked into these data were way back when I was a junior professor and there was like one or two studies that I could find. One of the studies pointed to increases in testosterone in rats, where they were had close proximity to these radio-frequency radiation waves. And then in the other case, it showed decreases in testosterone. So there really wasn't any conclusion to takeaway from that. Now, there's pretty impressive amount of data pointing to the fact that there are effects of these things on hormones. I don't know what to do with that information. I'm not going to stop using my phone but, in light of the work from Tyrone Hayes and others looking at sperm counts and looking at the decrease in testosterone levels and sperm counts and fertility over the last 20, 30 years, perhaps it's you know, not surprising. Although there again, cell phones and smartphones have really been in prominent use mostly within the last 10 or 11 years. And so it's hard to explain all of those declines simply on the basis of cell phone use. There's some interesting effects of hormones that actually you can observe on the outside of people, that tell you something about not just their level of hormones, but also about their underlying genetics. And these relate to beard growth and baldness. And it's fascinating. The molecule, the hormone dihydrotestosterone, made from testosterone, is the hormone primarily responsible for facial hair, for beard growth. As well, it's the molecule, the hormone primarily responsible for lack of hair on the head, for hair loss. So how does that work? Well, DHT circulates in the body and it binds to DHT receptors in the face to promote hair growth. But it binds to DHD receptors on the scalp to promote hair loss. Not incidentally, the drugs that are designed to prevent hair loss are 5-alpha-reductase inhibitors. So remember 5-alpha-reductase from the Guevedoces? Well, the people that discovered the Güevedoces, went on to do a lot of research on the underlying biochemistry of this really interesting molecule dihydrotestosterone. They identified 5-alpha-reductase. and 5-alpha-reductase inhibitors are the basis of most of the anti-hair loss treatments that are out there. And so there's some interesting things here. First of all, the side effect profiles of those treatments for hair loss are quite severe in many individuals. Remember DHT is the primary androgen for libido, for strengthened connective tissue repair, for aggression. Even if that aggression of course is held in check, but just sort of ambition and aggression is related to dopamine, but within the testosterone pathway, less so pure testosterone, although pure testosterone has its effects. But DHT is, at least in primate species including humans, is the dominant androgen for most of those sorts of effects. And if you look at somebody, everyone can predict whether or not they're going to go bald based on looking at their, we're always taught our mother's father. So if your mother's father was bald, there's a higher probability that you're going to go bald. The pattern of DHT receptors on the scalp, will dictate whether or not you're going to go bald everywhere or just in the front or the so called crown type baldness. And the density of the beard tells you about the density of DHT receptors. Now this varies by background, by genetic background. And actually around the world nowadays, because people travel and people form couples and have kids with so many different people of different mixed cultures. You're seeing this starting to disappear. But there are areas areas of the world where all the men seem to have the same pattern of baldness, like a strip of baldness down the center, with hair still on the sides and and full beards. That's because these patterns of DHT receptors are genetically determined. Elsewhere, testosterone levels can still be very high, DHT levels in the blood can be very high and yet people will have very light beards or no beards. And that's because they don't have a lot of DHT receptors in the face. And in still other cultures you'll see people with huge beard, tons of beard. Their beards are growing all the way up to their eyes and they have huge heads of hair. And that's because they have a lot of DHT receptors on the face and not on the scalp. So there are a lot of effects of DHT that you can just see in male phenotypes. And it's interesting that these hair loss drugs that are, or to prevent hair loss drugs, are directly aimed at preventing the conversion of testosterone into dihydrotestosterone. And that's why they to some extent prevent hair loss, but also to some extent have, a bunch of side effects that are associated with low DHT. Along these lines there's a particular sports supplement that a lot of people use called Creatine. Creatine, now there's a lot of research showing that Creatine can bring more more water into the muscle. It can support strength. It does a number of other things. Might even have some important cognitive promoting. Cognitive enhancement effects, although mild. The studies there show that it can be significant. Some people, not all it's more anecdotal, report that creatine promotes hair loss. It differs by individual. For some people that's true, for others no. But yes it does appear, based on the studies I was able to find on PubMed, that creatine does promote 5-alpha-reductase activity and therefore the conversion of testosterone into dihydrotestosterone. And so it makes sense that it might promote some degree of hair loss, as well as beard growth, as well as the other effects of DHT. I recall in junior high school and middle school, going home one Summer it was seventh grade, coming back in the eighth grade and a kid that I knew that I was friends with, went from being like a young kid to, he was like a grown man, he had a full beard. It was amazing. It was like he would completely transformed. And in puberty as I've said before, is without a doubt the most accelerated rate of development that we will go through at any point in our lives. Even faster than infancy just in terms of the huge number of different cognitive changes and physical changes. Not surprisingly that same individual was mostly or bald by his early twenties. And that's because he must have had just exceedingly high levels of DHT. I also played soccer with this kid and he was basically like dribbling past everybody. It who was like a grown man, playing soccer with a bunch of little kids. Full beard you know, bald at 20. And so the rate of maturation, the rate of aging is very interesting. It's hard to know rate of aging. There's some genetic tests that now can allow you to do that. Things like Horvath Clocks and things of that sort. Beautiful work of David Sinclair at Harvard and others has pointed to this. The speed of entry and exit from puberty might be, I'm putting it out there as a hypothesis. Might be an interesting window, into how fast one is going through their aging or developmental arc. Because development of course, doesn't just start at birth and end after puberty. It continues your entire life. So I think it's interesting. You will often see that people, boys and girls. I should say boys or girls, will develop secondary sexual characteristics at different rates. And sometimes it's sequential. You know you might see a kid will, she'll grow very tall or she'll have a big growth spurt, but then breast development will come a little bit later. And then other features will come a little bit later. You can also see this in boys. The person that I referred to earlier, my friend that developed a full beard, you know, went bald. He was also quite muscular, he was a great athlete. So he went through puberty exceedingly fast. Other people go through it more slowly. Some people will go through puberty at age 14, but they won't start to accumulate facial hair until much, much later. Or their voice will change first, very early. And then they won't get the other secondary sexual characteristics until much later. And so, we don't really know how that impacts or relates to overall trajectory or rate of aging. But it's an interesting thing to think about for each and every one of us. I'm going to offer you the opportunity to do an experiment today, while listening to the podcast. But first I want to tell you a story about hyenas, professional baseball and clitoris's the size of penises. So when I was a graduate student at UC Berkeley, we had a professor in our department, phenomenal scientist named Steve Glickman. Steve Glickman, had a colony of hyenas, spotted hyenas that lived, within caged enclosures of course, in Tilden Park behind the UC Berkeley campus. The enclosures are actually still there. I run past there fairly often. The hyenas are no longer there. This was a Federally Funded field station. These animals were brought over from Africa or were bred there. And the reason why they were hyenas in Tilden Park, enclosed in Tilden Park. Was because hyenas exhibit an incredible feature to their body, their hormones and their social structure. Hyenas, unlike many species, have a situation with their genitalia where the male penis is actually smaller than the female clitoris. And I should say that the male penis itself, having seen a fair number of hyena penises, is not particularly small. Which means that the hyena clitoris's are extremely large. This was well known for some time. It turns out that in these spotted hyenas the females are dominant. So after a kill the females will eat, then they're young will eat. And then the male hyenas will eat. As well, when the female hyena gives birth, she gives birth, not through the vaginal canal that we're accustomed to seeing, but through a very enlarged clitoris's like phallus. Although it's not a phallus, it's a clitoris. And it literally splits open. So many fetuses die during the course of hyena development and birth. These animals have this, what could only be described as a very large or giant clitoris. Although for a hyena it's not giant, it's normal. And it splits open and the baby actually comes through. The baby hyena actually comes through the tissue and it's it's a very traumatic birth. A lot of tissue is torn away, et cetera. And as I mentioned, a lot of baby hyenas die. It was a mystery as to how the female hyenas have this we'll call it masculinization, but it's really a androgen jet. Excuse me, androgenization of the periphery. Of the genitalia. And it turns out, through a lot of careful research done by Steve Glickman, Christine Drey and others. That it's androstenedione. What is essentially a pro hormone to testosterone? It's androstenedione at very high levels that's produced in female hyenas that creates this enlargement of their genitalia. So if you want to read up on androstenedione. Androstenedione is made into testosterone through this enzyme 17-beta-hydroxy steroid dehydrogenase it's a complicated pathway to pronounce. It's a fairly straightforward pathway biochemically. You may recall during the 90's and 2000's there were a lot of performance enhancing drug scandals, in particular in Major League Baseball. And it was purported, although I don't know that it was ever verified. But it was purported that the major performance enhancing drug of abuse at that time, in particular players whose names we won't mention but you can Google it if you want to find out. Was androstenedione. And I actually recall long ago, when you could buy androstenedione in the health food stores. And so it was sold over the counter. So a lot's changed since then. But it's interesting that these hyenas, with these highly androgenized genitalia accomplish that through high levels of androstenedione in the females. Now if that's unusual, what might be even more unusual is that a graduate student that I was working with at the time. Alongside we didn't share research. Her name was Nicola Sitka. She is actually a trained behavioral, animal behavioral expert. She had trained ferrets for that show the "BeastMaster." And she had trained wolves for television shows and was a dog trainer. She had these two large dogs that, unlike my dog would actually listen to her when she would give them commands. A remarkable scientist. She was studying a species of mole that also lived in Tilden Park. People are going to start to wonder about Tilden Park, what's in Tilden Park? But this particular mole that lived there had testes for part of the year and had the capacity to trans differentiate its testes into ovaries in order to balance out the ratio of males and females in the population to keep reproduction at appropriate levels for that certain population. So some animals are actually able to adjust whether or not they have androgenized or estrogenized gonads, in order to adjust the ratios of offspring or the males and females in therefor promote offspring. And the last little anecdote about this, which is also published in the scientific literature, which is weird but I do find interesting. Hormones are so fascinating, they're just incredible to me is going back to the marijuana plant. You know, the marijuana plant has these estrogenic properties. And I asked a plant biologist whether or not this was unusual. And I asked because there's all this stuff out there about, "Oh, you know, Soy does this. And these plants are highly estrogenic, et cetera." Although we should probably point out that a lot of factory meats are also estrogenic. So this isn't a meat versus plants thing. But this plant biologist told me, "Oh yeah, there are plants that make what is essentially the equivalent of testosterone like pine pollen as it looks a lot like testosterone. And there are other plants that make what is essentially estrogen. And I said, "Well, why would they do that?" Well and you know plants, at least as far as I know, don't have a consciousness. They don't have a brain. They don't have neurons even but, his answer was fascinating. He said that, one of the reasons why some plants have evolved this capacity to increase estrogen levels in animals that smoke, not smoke it but then animals that consume them. I'm guessing that animals aren't smoking marijuana. Although I don't know, send me the paper if you've heard of this. Is that plants have figured out ways. They've adapted ways to push back on populations of rodents and other species of animals that eat them. So plants are engaged in a kind of plant to animal warfare where they increase the estrogen of the males in that population to lower the sperm counts, to keep those populations clamped at certain levels so that those plants can continue to flourish. Even if those animals are reproducing very robustly. And I find this just fascinating. And hormones therefore, aren't just impacting tissue growth and development within the individual and between the mother. Remember the placenta is an endocrine organ, and the offspring, but plants and animals are in this communication. And today we're in this communication, I'm telling you that there are certain herbicides that humans are using for which there's very good data, are disrupting the endocrine pathways. And so it's fascinating that humans and other animals, we're always in this interplay with plants and the other things in our environment. And hormones and adjusting the hormone levels of animals and plants is one way in which the environment kind of pushes back or pushes forward if you will, in terms of promoting their well-being and longevity, as well as you trying to promote your wellbeing and longevity. If anyone wants to see the incredible paper by Steve Glickman and colleagues. It was published in the proceedings of the national Academy. First in 1987, that's Glickman et al. That was the hypothesis that it was androstenedione . And then if you just Google Glickman hyenas science magazine, there's a beautiful cover article and feature all about that important discovery, it's a fascinating one. And I should mention also that those discoveries, both the moles and the hyenas weren't just impactful for the world of animal behavior and endocrinology, they've also strongly impacted understanding of conditions that show up in the clinic, which we haven't talked about today. Which is actually pseudo hermaphroditism. Occasionally babies will be born where it is unclear, if they are boys or girls based on the genitalia. And this has a very important ethical and other issues. Do you raise them as a boy or a girl? It's not super uncommon for this to happen. And there have been terrible cases where people have gone against the chromosomal sex. And the person was very unhappy with the the choice that their parents had made for them. There were also cases where they've gone with a chromosomal sex and the person was very happy about the outcome. There've been cases where they've been treated with hormones and there been cases where they have not been treated with hormones. It's a complicated literature and it has to be sorted out on kind of a case by case basis, but it is something that does happen. And the studies on androstenedione in hyenas and in these very interesting moles, pseudo-hermaphroditic moles that live in Tilden Park, have impacted not just the science but the therapeutics around those important issues. So now last but not least, I want to discuss the effects of hormones while you and I were separately in utero and the effects that that had on who we are, who we select as mates. So mate choice, sexual preference. And all other aspects of what you would call sexual development. Now this is something that's gotten a lot of popular press and it has to do with how exposure to androgens in particular while we were in utero, impacted whether or not people report as homosexual, heterosexual, identify as male or female. I'm very familiar with this work because I was a graduate student in the department that first published this work and I'm an author on the paper. I was not the main driver of the work, but I was involved in the work. And I certainly know the people that did this work. First it starts with a story. There was a researcher who's still going now. His name is Dennis McFadden. I believe he was at UT Austin back then. And he was studying the auditory system. And people would come into his clinic and he would, or his laboratory. And he would look at hearing and he would explore different aspects of what they call the psychophysics of hearing and understanding hearing thresholds and frequency thresholds. And he made several observations. And those observations were that young males tended to have what are called auto acoustic emissions, more often than young females did. Auto acoustic emissions, as the name suggests, are the ears actually making sounds. Now these sounds have to be picked up by a special apparatus, because they can hear into that frequency. But it turns out that your ears don't just take sound waves and convert them into this thing we call hearing. But they also in some cases make sound. So your ears are making sounds. Strange right? So it turns out that there's a sex difference in auto acoustic emissions. It turns out also that people that self-report as lesbians, they also have auto acoustic emissions significantly more than females that don't self-report as lesbian. And Dennis noticed this and published this. And it was an important discovery because it was one of the first discoveries that pointed to the fact that there are sex differences in biology that are independent of sex. I mean, this is hearing and auto acoustic emissions. And just to really illustrate what that. What the former problem was and why this study was so important? You know, a lot of people had explored for instance whether or not, homosexuals had lower testosterone for instance in males. And actually the result often was the opposite. That gay men or men that self-report is gay, often had much higher testosterone. And those studies then became controversial because people said, "Well, sexual behavior can relate to testosterone," et cetera. And so it became very controversial. And then there were some studies that attempted to look at the equivalent phenomenon in people that self report as lesbian. Or self-report as heterosexual. And so it became very complicated. But this was an identification of a phenomenon, auto acoustic emissions, that was independent of anything that had to do with sexual or even social behavior. 1998 rolls around. And I'm a graduate student at UC Berkeley and a guy by the name of Mark Breedlove. Kind of an ironic name, given that he worked on. He worked and still works on sexual dimorphism in the brain and in the spinal cord and nervous system. And Mark, who's a phenomenal scientist comes running down the hall. I'll never forget this. And he said, "Give me your hands." I was like, [indistinct]. He's like, "Give me your hands." And he pulls out a ruler and he starts measuring my fingers. And he takes down a couple of measurements and then he goes away. And I was like, "What was that?" Well, I was in a course that Mark was teaching at that point. And soon after, we did a study that Mark directed exploring the finger length ratios. And I'll explain what those are. Of males and females, and people that self-reported as homosexual or heterosexual. So let's just get to the basic, what we'll call sex differences first. These are averages. I want to point out. Anytime you get into this kind of topic, people assume it's causal, but it's not causal. These are averages that I'm about to report. It is the case that the ratio of what's called the D2 to D4 digits. So the D2 is your index finger. So your thumb is D1. Then D2 would be your index finger that you would point with. Middle finger is D3, which you whatever with. And then D4 is the so-called ring finger. Okay and D5 is the pinky. It is the case that the D2 to D4 ratio is greater in self-reported females than it is in males. What does that mean? It means that digit D4 and D4 are more similar in length in females than in men males. And that effect is particularly, excuse me, pronounced on the right hand. Although not always, okay? And it does not have to do with handedness. This D2 to D4 difference has to be measured correctly. You can't just look at somebody who's hands and say, "Oh, their ring finger and index finger are very similar. And therefore they are female you know. Or they were exposed to very little testosterone in utero." You can't look at somebody and see that their index finger is much shorter than their ring finger and say, "Oh, they must've been exposed to a lot of androgen." You have to actually measure it and you have to measure it correctly. You have to measure it from the base of the finger where there's that first crease, all the way to the tip past the. You can't include the fingernails. If you're growing fingernails, it'd be logical here folks. So you can't normally see it from the back of the hand. Although, I don't know if this'll show up here but if you look at the back of the hand sometimes you can see it. You know, in my case for instance. Let me see if I can do this. So my D4 is a little bit longer than my D2. In some people it's more pronounced and that's on my right hand. On the other hand, the difference actually is far less pronounced. Is it's a little bit. it's a little bit pronounced there, but not so much okay? So that's sort of the typical ratio that you would see. It turns out that in mice and in humans, the more androgen that you were exposed to in utero, the smaller the D4 D2 ratio. Meaning that the ring finger tends to be slightly longer than the pointer finger. And in females because they're exposed to less androgen in utero typically. Then those fingers tend to be more equal in length. And these are subtle differences and these are averages. I invite you to look up the paper. This was published in Nature in 2000 and it's been replicated six times. Now, here's where it gets even more interesting. And potentially precarious, so we're going to step cautiously here. If you look at the finger length ratios of men that self-report as homosexual, they have either the typical male pattern of D2 to D4 ratio or a hyper masculinized D4 to D2 ratio. Now this can't be something that's established or modified by behavior. This has to be something that was established in utero. And in fact, it's present at birth okay? So it completely divorces the interactions between hormones and behavior. And that's an important theme that we've been talking about. And we're going to talk about even more. Next episode is that hormones impact behavior but behavior also impact hormones. But this is a case of hormones impacting what really should be considered a primary sexual characteristic. Because it doesn't show up in puberty, it shows up before puberty. It's actually established in utero. And in people that self-reported lesbians. And I remember going out there and collecting these data with, with the collaborators on this work. Again, I wasn't the main driver on the work. But I participated in some of the analysis. People that self-report as lesbians also tend to have a smaller D2 to D4 ratio. So this is consistent with the auto acoustic emission study that Dennis McFadden had published. And it points to the fact that early exposure to androgens may have an impact, not just on androgenization of the body plan, but also separately on sexual preference. Now, this raises all sorts of interesting questions about biological basis of sexual preference. I'll tell you about another study. A guy named Simon LeVay who was at UCLA. Who trained under Hubel and Wiesel. If any of you remember early episodes on "Plasticy," David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel my scientific great-grandparents won the Nobel Prize for discovery of critical periods for brain plasticity. They defined some of the most important aspects of how we see and brain plasticity. Simon LeVay trained with them. And then Simon went on to discover that in the brains of people that self-report homosexual there is a brain difference. And the brain difference is in an area called the Interstitial Nucleus of the Anterior Hypothalamus. So it's the INAH. And so there are published reports. That was published in Science. The other work I refer to as published in Nature, and then replicated no fewer than six times. And the McFadden results that point to strong biological correlates of mate choice, of sexual preference. And these tie directly to things like androgenization or estrogenization. Meaning we could call it maleness or femaleness, but that's sort of tricky territory. Because of the way that we described the huge range in which sex can be defined earlier. So, if you want to measure your D2 D4 ratio you're welcome to, but you also have to understand that it's not predictive of anything, right? It's just a window into the possible androgen exposure that you had early in life. There are plenty of men who report themselves as heterosexual who are out there who have similar or have D2 D4 ratios to females. And there are plenty of females whose index fingers are shorter than their ring fingers. And they're perfectly happy where they say they're perfectly happy. And we are inclined to believe them being heterosexual. So there's variation. In fact, Mark tells a really good joke. If you want to know whether or not somebody is homosexual or heterosexual, simply look at their hands, look at their D2 D4 ratio and guess heterosexual. And you'll be right 96% of the time. Because 96% of the time people report themselves as heterosexual on average. Those numbers might be changing. So the joke really is a joke on science because, that falls within the realm of statistical significance. And yet it really illustrates the fact that none of this is causal. But it's nonetheless very interesting because it means that hormones are organizing the brain early in development in ways that can potentially impact same or opposite sex partner choice later in life. Now of course, there are other things that can impact opposite sex or same-sex partner choice later in life. The study did not look at people who reported bisexual. There hasn't been a lot of studies on that yet. One thing that's very interesting, for which there are some good scientific data but there's also some controversy is that, it appears that the probability of a male human self-reporting as homosexual, increases with the number of older brothers that he has. Now, that doesn't mean if you have an older brother or even if you have 10 older brothers, that you are sure to self-report as homosexual. But statistically it becomes more likely that somebody will with each successive older brother that they have. And the idea that starting to emerge, in the developmental neuroendocrinology landscape is that there's a record within the mother of how many male fetuses she's carried, because male fetuses are secreting certain things, dihydrotestosterone, other things, that can feed back on to the genome. So these could be epigenomic effects or onto the placenta itself, so that there's a higher probability in subsequent pregnancies that offspring will self-report as homosexual. So it's a fascinating area of biology. And as you've noticed today, none of this deals with the current controversies around gender and how many genders and sex, et cetera That's a separate conversation that is by definition grounded in the kind of concepts we've been talking about today and needs to take place, taking into consideration all of the aspects of sex and the effects of hormones, both on the body, on the brain. We didn't talk a lot about spinal cord, but we will in the next episode. But we can just say on the brain and the periphery, early effects, late effects, acute effects, meaning effects that are very fast of levels of hormones going up or down. Something that absolutely happens during and across the menstrual cycle. As well as long-term effects like the effects of these hormones on gene expression. So today, as always, we weren't able to cover all things related to sex and hormones and sexual differentiation or development. There's no way we could. But we have covered a lot of material. We talked about some effects of environmental toxins. We talked about potential effects of cell phone radiation. Something I never thought that I would be talking about, especially not in a podcast. But for which there are interesting emerging data. We talked about considerations about Evening Primrose Oil and its estrogenic effects. About Creatine and its pro DHT effects. About cannabis, alcohol. About plants exerting warfare on animals by increasing aromatase. The conversion of testosterone to estrogen. We talked about hyenas with giant clitoris's. And we talked about moles that can revert from having ovaries to testicles. And throughout this Costello has been snoring nonstop. He missed all of it. Although he might be learning it in his sleep for all I know. And I do understand it's a lot of information, a lot of detail as always. I just want to remind you, you don't have to absorb all the information at once. Next episode, we are going to be talking about the science of sex, the verb, actual reproduction. We're also going to be talking about effects of hormones on various aspects of behavior and ways to modulate hormones, through the use of behavior, supplementation. Also we'll touch on diet and nutrition a bit. And we're going to talk about interactions between those things and behavior, as they relate to important themes like sex and reproduction. Like workplace performance. Like motivation and drive and even anxiety. There's a very interesting relationship between hormones and anxiety and the desire to explore novelty. So just to remember as we go forward that, hormones affect behavior and behavior affects hormones. But that doesn't mean that cutting off your index finger will increase your testosterone. Many of you have asked how you can help support the podcast. And we thank you for the question. There are several ways to do that. The first one is to subscribe on YouTube. If you haven't subscribed to the YouTube channel already, please do so. As well, please hit the subscribe button. So you're sure not to miss any of the episodes. We do release episodes every Monday, but we also occasionally release short clips in between. As well, if you could subscribe on Apple and or Spotify, that's very helpful. And on Apple you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review and to leave a comment. On YouTube, please do leave us comments and suggestions for future episodes. We really appreciate the feedback and we appreciate those suggestions. Also ask us any questions you have about the material. Those questions help guide our office hours, this discussion about your questions that we hold from time to time, as well as inform future content. Also, if you could tell people about the podcast. Please tell your family, your friends, your coworkers anyone that you think might benefit from the material. That really helps us get the word out. As well, if you're interested in supplements. We've partnered with Thorne. T-H-O-R-N-E. And we've partnered with Thorne because, Thorne has the highest level of stringency with respect to the ingredients that they put in their products. As well as the precise amounts of those contents. You know, a lot of supplement brands out there claim to have X amount of some supplement, but then when people have measured the amount in capsules and tablets, it's turned out to be very different. Thorne is very precise about this. They partnered with important and stringent institutions like the Mayo Clinic, all the major sports teams. So that's why we partnered with Thorne. If you want to try any of Thorne's products, if you want to see what I take you can go to Thorne that's thorne.com/u/huberman And if you do that you can see any of the products that I take. You can get 20% off any of those. As well as 20% off any of the other products that Thorne makes. So that's thorne.com/u/huberman. Please also check out our sponsors. Check out the sponsor links. That's perhaps the best way to support us. And of course, I want to point out, that any of the ways that support us, whether or not they are cost-free like subscribing and leaving comments or whether or not you're interested in the products that I've referred to, those all help us. And so we really appreciate it. So once again, I want to thank you for embarking on this journey through neuroscience and today neuroendocrinology with me. And as always, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 335 ---
Video ID: hcuMLQVAgEg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hcuMLQVAgEg
Title: The Science of Emotions & Relationships
Published: 2021-03-29 12:00:13 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I discuss the biology of emotions and moods in the context of relationships. I focus on the science of how early infant-caregiver attachment, combined with adolescence and puberty shapes our adult patterns of attachment. I explain the three universal aspects of emotions, the reality of right-brain versus left-brain personalities, and how the roots of adult attachment are also grounded in specific aspects of puberty. I review what factors determine when puberty starts and ends, and the role of oxytocin and other chemicals in controlling how we perceive and remember others. As always, I refer to various practical tools including new tools for understanding and predicting our emotions before they occur, and neurochemicals that shape human connection.

#HubermanLab #Emotions #Neuroscience

Thank you to our sponsors:
InsideTracker - https://insidetracker.com/huberman
ExpressVPN - http://expressvpn.com/huberman
Magic Spoon - http://magicspoon.com/huberman

Supplements from Thorne:
http://www.thorne.com/u/huberman

Links:
NSDR - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pL02HRFk2vo
Mood Meter App - https://moodmeterapp.com/
Adolescence and The Brain - https://www.nature.com/articles/nature25770
Vagus and Depression - https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2015/05/18/lighting-the-brain

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab
Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Join the Neural Network - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Timestamps
00:00:00 Introduction 
00:05:10 Announcing New Cost-Free Resources: Captions, NSDR Link 
00:07:40 Emotions: Subjective Yet Tractable  
00:10:53 To Understand Your Emotions: Look At Infancy & Puberty  
00:15:21 Your First Feeling Was Anxiety 
00:17:36 What Are “Healthy Emotions”?  
00:19:03 Digital Tool For Predicting Your Emotions: Mood Meter App 
00:21:08 The Architecture Of A Feeling: (At Least) 3 Key Questions To Ask Yourself 
00:24:00 You Are An Infant: Bonds & Predictions 
00:27:57 Attachment Style Hinges On How You Handle Disappointment  
00:32:40 “Glue Points” Of Emotional Bonds: Gaze, Voice, Affect, Touch, (& Written) 
00:36:34 “Emotional Health”: Awareness of the Interoceptive-Exteroceptive Dynamic 
00:37:50 An Exercise: Controlling Interoceptive-Exteroceptive Bias 
00:42:19 Getting Out Of Your Head: The Attentional Aperture  
00:46:59 Puberty: Biology & Emotions On Deliberate Overdrive 
00:47:58 Bodyfat & Puberty: The Leptin Connection 
00:50:34 Pheromones: Mates, Timing Puberty, Spontaneous Miscarriage  
00:54:37 Kisspeptin: Robust Trigger Of Puberty & Performance Enhancing Agent 
00:58:26 Neuroplasticity Of Emotions: Becoming Specialists & Testing Emotional Bonds 
01:00:25 Testing Driving Brain Circuits For Emotion: Dispersal 
01:07:48 Science-Based Recommendations for Adolescents and Teens: The Autonomy Buffet 
01:11:05 “Right-Brain Versus Left-Brain People”: Facts Versus Lies  
01:14:18 Left Brain = Language, Right Brain = Spatial Awareness 
01:16:15 How To Recognize “Right Brain Activity” In Speech: Prosody 
01:18:32 Oxytocin: The Molecule of Synchronizing States 
01:20:09 Mirror Neurons: Are Not For “Empathy”, Maybe For Predicting Behavior  
01:23:00 Promoting Trust & Monogamy 
01:27:00 Ways To Increase Oxytocin 
01:28:34 Vasopressin: Aphrodisiac, Non-Monogamy and Anti-Bed-Wetting Qualities 
01:30:43 Bonding Bodies, Not Just Minds: Vagus Nerve, Depression Relief Via the Body 
01:35:18 A Powerful Tool For Enhancing Range & Depth of Emotional Experience 
01:30:43 MDMA and Other Psychedelic Compounds: Building A Framework 
01:38:54 Roundup, Various Forms of Support 

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English (United States)
- [Andrew Huberman] Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. - My name is Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and inform your health goals. I'm a big believer in getting blood test taken, because it's simply the only way to get in-depth data about your metabolic factors, hormones, all the things that inform your immediate and long-term health. Nowadays, there are also excellent DNA tests that can further inform you about your immediate and long-term health. Now the problem with most blood tests out there is that you get information back, you get a lot of numbers, and they'll tell you whether or not your numbers are in normal range or high or low, but they don't inform you what steps to take as a consequence. In addition, they can often be very confusing, what all the factors are and what they really mean. InsideTracker has a dashboard and a platform that makes interpreting all that information really easy. It also points you in the direction of certain lifestyle factors, exercise, nutrition et cetera, that you might want to change in order to bring the numbers into the ranges that you want. So InsideTracker is something that I've been doing for some time now, and it's really helped me inform the choices. For instance, I've swapped out some of the foods that I was eating regularly. I found out I was actually too high in certain vitamins and minerals, I was too low in others. It's really helped me adjust my diet and my exercise regimes. And it really gives me the confidence that I'm on the path to long-term health. So if you want to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Use the code Huberman at checkout, that's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsidTracker's plans and use the code Huberman at checkout. Our next sponsor is ExpressVPN. ExpressVPN is a virtual private network that keeps your data safe and secure and private. It does that by routing your internet activity through their servers and encrypting it so that no one can see or sell your data. I started using ExpressVPN because my bank account got hacked. I still don't know exactly how it happened, but it was an absolute mess. I lost money, I lost a lot of time. I wouldn't want to have it happen to anybody. When that happened, I talked to my friends in the tech community and they told me that even though you think your internet connection is secure oftentimes it's not. So I tend to use internet connections on planes, in hotels, in cafes, but also at home. And I was told that even at home, your data may not be as secure as you think. And so with ExpressVPN, your data is absolutely secure, so are your online activities. The great thing is you don't even notice that it's operating, it's running in the background. You just turn it on and it goes without you realizing that your data is being protected, it doesn't interfere with any of your online activities. So I use ExpressVPN when I travel, anytime I'm outside the house, when I'm at work and when I'm at home. If you want to try ExpressVPN, you can go to expressvpn.com/huberman. And if you do that, you'll get an extra three months free on one of their one-year packages. That's expressvpn.com/huberman to get three months free on a one-year package. The final sponsor of today's podcast is Magic Spoon. Magic Spoon is a zero-sugar, grain-free, keto-friendly cereal. As I've mentioned before on the podcast, I'm neither ketogenic, nor am I all-meat, nor am I vegan. The way I eat is that early in the day I fast, and then sometime around noon I eat my first meal, and that meal is always low carbohydrate, and then throughout the day, I maintain a low carbohydrate diet. The fasting and low carbohydrate diet during the daytime optimizes alertness and wakefulness, I want to be awake and be able to work. And then at night is when I eat my carbohydrates, 'cause it facilitates the transition to sleep. So for me, Magic Spoon is a terrific snack in the afternoon. I'll sometimes even have it with lunch. And the reason I like it is because it tastes really delicious, and it's compatible with the keto-friendly or keto-like meals that I eat throughout the day. They come in a variety of flavors, cocoa, fruity, peanut butter, frosted. I particularly like the frosted because it tastes like donuts, in my opinion, and I love donuts. As a consequence, I love Magic Spoon cereal. I can consume it. It tastes like a pastry and it has zero grams of sugar, and it's compatible with this nutritional regimen I mentioned earlier. If you want to try Magic Spoon, you can go to magicspoon.com/huberman to grab a variety pack. Use the code Huberman at checkout and get $5 off your order. That's magicspoon.com/huberman, and use the code Huberman to get $5 off. This month, we're talking all about the science of emotions and tools related to the science of emotions. We've talked about the science of stress and resiliency, tools to access more calm, tools raise your stress threshold, to become more resilient. We've talked about motivation and the role of the dopamine system. I'd like to make a couple of announcements about some new resources. The first one is that we have now captioned all the Huberman Lab episodes in English and in Spanish. We were able to do that, thanks to your support of our sponsors and on Patreon. So now, all of the podcasts have a captioning feature on YouTube, and those were done by experts. So while there might be the occasional error, for the most part, they're very precise. We've done that so that people that prefer to consume the content in Spanish or that like to read the content from the English subtitles can do so. And we're going to continue to expand the number of languages that are captioned for the Huberman Lab Podcast. So we want to thank you for that resource. It's now available for all episodes. In addition, in previous episodes I've talked about NSDR or non-sleep depressed. NSDRs come in in a variety of different forms, there's self-hypnosis. I've pointed you to some resources for that previously. There's yoga nidra. NSDR is really about achieving calm quickly, and doing that in a self-directed way, for many reasons, in order to access sleep more readily, in order to de-stress very deeply, in order to replace sleep that you've lost. It also seems to aid neuroplasticity. It can enhance the rearrangements of connections in the brain that occur during learning, there's scientific support for that. There's a link in today's episode caption to a new site. This is a YouTube video that was brought free of cost by the folks over at Madefor, a company that's been a sponsor of the podcast previously. So this is an NSDR script that doesn't contain any of the intentions or some of the more typical language of yoga nidra, instead it's focused purely on the breathing protocols, as well as includes a sort of body scan where you direct your attention to different locations around your body. It has all the core elements of non-sleep deep rest, but is distinct from yoga nidra. I just offer this to you as a resource. If you'd like to use it, it's about 30 minutes long, and should be very effective in bringing you into deep states of relaxation for all the reasons I mentioned before. So let's talk about emotions. Emotions are a fascinating and vital aspect of our life experience. It's fair to say that emotions make up most of what we think of as our experience of life, even the things we do, our behaviors and the places we go, and the people we end up encountering in our life, all of that really funnels into our emotional perception of what those things mean, whether or not they made us happy or sad or depressed or lonely, or were all inspiring. Now one thing that is absolutely true is that everyone's perception of emotion is slightly different. Meaning, your idea of happy is very likely different than my idea of what a state of happiness is. And we know this also for color vision, for instance, even though the cells in your eye and my eye that perceive the color red are identical right down to the genes that they express, we can be certain based on experimental evidence, and what are called psychophysical studies, that your idea of the most intense red is going to be very different than my idea of the most intense red if we were given a selection of 10 different reds and asked which one is most intense, which one looks most red, and that seems crazy, you would think that something as simple as color would be universal, and yet it's not. And so we need to agree at the outset that emotions are complicated and yet they are tractable. They can be understood. And today we're going to talk about a lot of tools to understand what emotions are for you to understand what your emotional states mean and what they don't mean. And in doing that, that will allow you to place value on whether or not you should hold an emotional state as true or not true, whether or not it has meaning or it doesn't, as well as whether or not the emotions of others are important to you in a given context. We're going to talk a lot about development. In fact, we're going to center a lot of our discussion today around infancy and puberty. We're also going to talk about tools for enhancing one's emotional range and for navigating difficult emotional situations. I'm not a clinical psychologist, I'm not a therapist, but I do have some background in psychology. And today I'm going to be drawing from the psychology greats, not me, but from the greats of psychology who studied emotion, who studied emotional development, and linking that to the neuroscience of emotion. Because nowadays we understand a lot about the chemicals and the hormones and the neural circuits in the brain and body that underlie emotion. So while there's no one single universally true theory of emotion, at the intersection of many of the existing theories, there are really some ground truth. So today we're going to visit those ground truths. We're going to talk about the tools that emerge from them. And we're going to talk about some absolutely wild and wacky experiments that people are doing out there right now, that I don't necessarily recommend you do, of inhaling different types of hormones and trying to get attached more quickly. You're actually going to do some experiential stuff today if you like. There's some things that you can do in real time while listening to the podcast, in order to tap into some of the mechanisms that I'll be referring to. So today's going to be very interactive in a way that previous podcast episodes have not. If we want to understand emotions, we have to look at where emotions first develop. In fact, this is a critical central theme if you want to understand brain science and psychology. There's a rule in neuroanatomy. Because if you look at 50 different brains of humans or you compare the brains of dogs and humans, there are a lot of differences. Certain things are the same but certain things are different. And the rule that every good neuroanatomist knows is that if you want to understand what a part of the brain does, you have to address two questions. First, you have to know what connections does that brain area make? What is it connected to? Where does it get inputs from and where does it send inputs? So for instance, if there's an area of the brain that gets direct input from the neurons in the nose, you can be pretty certain that it has some role in analyzing smell in measuring something about odors or analyzing something about odors. Now if it also gets input from the eye, you can also conclude that it gets input from the visual system that it cares about light and photons. This is sort of obvious. And yet you need to know that connectivity, and you need to know what's called the developmental origin of that structure. You need to know where it was early in development, because things move around a lot as the brain develops. The brain, of course is this more or less squishy thing floating around in some liquid that stuffed inside your skull. And as a consequence, things move around a lot. They are not always in the same place in two different species or two individuals of the same species. So you have to know where they started out, because where they started out informs what they do as well. And when we're talking about emotions, we cannot point to one area of the brain. We can't say that's the area of the brain that's responsible for emotions. There is this so-called limbic system that has been linked to emotions in various ways. We're going to talk about that today. But the limbic system is just one component of the inputs to create emotions. It's not the place for emotions. You can't go in and lesion one location in the brain and eliminate emotions entirely, just doesn't work that way. So, first of all, we have to ask, what are the circuits for emotion? What are the brain areas for emotion? And nowadays there's a lot of debate about this. For years, it was thought that there might be circuits, meaning connections in the brain that generate the feeling of being happy or circuits that generate the feeling of being sad, et cetera. That's been challenged. In fact, Lisa Feldman Barrett has been the person who's really challenged this head-on, and has very good evidence for the fact that such circuits probably don't exist. And yet I think there's good evidence for circuits in the brain, such as limbic circuits and other circuits that shift our overall states or our overall level of alertness or calmness, or whether they're not, they bias us toward viewing the outside world or paying more attention to what's going on inside our bodies. If none of this makes sense right now, I promise it will make sense soon. But the important thing to understand is that emotions do arise in the brain and body. They arise because there are specific connections between specific areas in the brain and body. And if we want to understand how emotions work, we have to look how emotions are built. And they are built during infancy, adolescence, and puberty, and then it continues into adulthood. But the groundwork is laid down early in development when we are small children. So let's think about what happens to a baby that comes into the world. A baby comes into the world. You were born into this world without really any understanding of the things around you. Now, there are two ways that you can interact with the world and you're always doing them more or less to some degree at the same time. Those are interoception, paying attention what's going on inside you, what you feel internally, and exteroception, paying attention to what's going on outside you. Hold that in mind, please. Because the fact that you're both interocepting and exterocepting is true for your entire life, and it sets the foundation for understanding emotions. It's absolutely critical. As an infant, you didn't have any knowledge of what you needed. You didn't understand hunger, you didn't understand toys when you first came into the world, you didn't understand cold or heat or any of that. When you needed something, you experienced that as anxiety. You would feel an increase in alertness if you had to use the bathroom. you would feel an increase in alertness if you were hungry, and you would vocalize, you would cry out, you would act agitated. You might cue, you might do a number of different things, but all you knew was what you were feeling internally. And then your caregiver, whoever that might've been would respond to that. So you would feel some agitation, a caregiver would come and make a decision, Oh, you need food, and give you milk, or change your diaper or wrap you in a blanket if you were cold, but they didn't know if you were cold, they could just assume that you were cold. So this is actually really important to understand that a baby, when you were a baby, and when I was a baby, we didn't have any sense of the outside world except that it responded to our acts of anxiety essentially. Now this isn't Freudian theory, There are components of it that are embedded in Freudian theory, but all developmental psychologists agree that babies lack the ability to make cognitive sense of the outside world, but in this feeling of anxiety and registering one's own internal state, and then crying out to the outside world, either through crying or subtle vocalizations, or even just cuing, making some noise, we start to develop a relationship with the outside world in which our internal states, our shifts and anxiety start to drive requests, and people come and respond to those requests, hopefully. And the reason I say hopefully is that we've all heard presumably about these cases of neglect. There are a lot of cases where if you neglect a baby, you neglect an adolescent or a teenager, development doesn't go well, and we'll touch on some of those. But those are really extreme cases. They're sort of like the parallel to experiments that are often done in the laboratory with animals, where you've probably heard of these enriched environments where they'll give mice a bunch of toys, and they'll give them some different foods every once in a while, and they'll house them together with other mice. And then what you find is that the animals, they will say, "Oh, their brain is thicker and their neurons have more branches to them and all that." But that's really comparing deprivation with normalcy. What we want to center on today instead is what happens when things go well, and why things might not go well in certain circumstances is interesting. But to me, not as interesting as what healthy emotional development looks like. And if you haven't achieved healthy emotional development, what can be done as an intervention at later times in order to rescue that? So the baby, you as a baby, you're flopping around there in your crib, you're getting care where you need it and when you need it, presumably, and this gets to the basis of what emotions are about, which are emotions are really about forming bonds and being able to predict things in the world. That's really what emotions are about. Whether or not the baby feels angry or happy or sad, we don't know, we can guess, but we don't know. In fact, most of the time we don't even know how we feel, let alone how other people feel, and that's true for adults. So if I asked you how you feel right now, I don't know that you could tell me in any kind of rich language that I would say, "Oh I really understand." If you said you were very, very depressed or very, very happy, I'd have some sense because of how extreme that is, but I don't know that I would really know, and I don't think you know how I feel right now either. I could be furious right now or I could be very happy, you don't have any idea. And of course, we have these things called expressions, our pupils dilate. There are various cues of how people feel. We're going to talk about those cues, but you really don't know. And at this point I actually just want to pause and mention a really interesting tool that is trying to address this question of what are emotions and what do they consist of, that you can use if you like. This is an app, I didn't develop it, I don't have any relationship to them, but the app was developed by people at Yale, by groups at Yale who do research, and it's called Mood Meter. And it's actually quite interesting. I think it's either free or it's 0.99. Again, no business relationship to them. But what they're trying to do is put more nuance, more subtlety on our words, and our language for emotions, and be able to allow you to predict how you're going to feel in the future. And it's actually quite interesting. I'm on the app right now, and I know you can't see this, but it's called Mood Meter. And you can find on Apple or Android. And you go into and it asks you, it says to me, "Hi, Andrew, how are you right now? And I click the little tab that says I feel. And I can either pick high energy and unpleasant, high energy and pleasant, low energy unpleasant or low energy pleasant. And I would say right now I feel high energy pleasant. So I just revealed to you how I feel. So I click on that, and then it gives you a gallery of colors, and you just move your finger to the location where you think it matches most. And as you do that, little words pop up. I know some people are listening to this on audio only. So it say motivated, cheerful, inspired. I would say, I'm feeling right now, cheerful. So you click that and then you just go to the next window, and it just says, what are you doing? And this feels like play to me, but I'm going to call it work. And then that's it. And then what it does is it basically starts to collect data on you. You're giving it information. And it starts to link that to other features that you allowed access to if you like, and it starts helping you be able to predict how you're going to feel different times a day. It's actually quite accurate in certain ways, quite interesting. And it points to a couple of really interesting features, which is that we don't really have enough language to describe all the emotional states, and yet there's some core truths to what makes up an emotion. And I want to review that twice during today's podcast, because this can really help people, kids and adults understand better what they're feeling and why, and when best to engage in certain activities, and thankfully, when best to avoid certain activities too. So the way this works is the following. You need to ask yourself at any point, you could do this right now if you like, what's your level of autonomic arousal? Autonomic arousal is just the continuum, the range of alert to calm. So if you're in a panic right now, you are like 10 out of 10 on the arousal scale. If you're asleep, you're probably not comprehending what I'm saying, although maybe a little bit. But let's say you're very drowsy, you might be at a one or a two. So you always have to ask, where are you on the arousal scale? And then there's this other axis, this other question, which is what we call valence. Now valence is a value. Do you feel good or bad? I would say I feel pretty good right now. On a scale of one to 10, I'm like, I dunno, I feel like a seven. Got good night's sleep last night, had a good walk with Costello this morning, I'm fed, I'm hydrated. I feel good, So I'm like a seven. So I'm alert and I feel pretty good. And then there's a third thing, which is how much we are interocepting and how much we are exterocepting. So how much our attention is focused internally on what we're feeling and how much it's focused externally. And this is always going to be in a dynamic balance. So for instance, if you're really, really stressed, oftentimes that puts you in a position to be really in touch with what's going on in your body. If you start having a lot of somatic, a lot of bodily sensations, like your heart is beating so fast that you can't ignore it, then you're really strongly interoceptive. But also sometimes you're really stressed because someone's stressing you out or somebody sends you a text message or makes a comment about a YouTube thing you posted or something, and you're really triggered by it. That never happens to me. But if it does happen to you, then you're exterocepting. So these three things, how alert or sleepy you are, that's one, how good or bad you feel, that's two, and then whether or not most of your attention is directed outward, or whether or not it's directed inward. And much of what we call emotions are made up by those three things. And so let's return now to development, but tuck that away and just kind of think about it, alert versus asleep, good versus bad, and focused internally or focused externally. Because when I looked at all the theories of emotion that were out there, there were a lot of different components to them, but they all seem to center back to these same three features in some way or to some degree or another. And it can be very powerful to understand and look at your emotions through that lens. So let's return to the infant. There's the baby in the crib. It's mostly interocepting. As caregivers bring it what it needs, you hope, milk, diaper changes, et cetera, a warm blanket if it's cold, pull off the blanket when the baby's fussing and it's too warm, 'cause babies get too warm also, it starts to exterocept. Excuse me, I misspoke, I want to be very clear, it starts to exterocept. The baby starts to look into the outside world and start making predictions. It starts wondering how much it needs to cry or predicting, "Well, if I cry like a little bit, then mom comes over and I get my milk. Or if I cry a lot, mom doesn't come over and give me milk, so I need to really scream at the top of my head." So babies are starting to evaluate and do all this, but they're not doing it consciously. They're doing this strategically in order to relieve anxiety. And I won't propose that that's what we do into adulthood. But a lot of what we do in adulthood is when we feel something, we start exterocepting. Some people are much better at just sitting as a container and just interocepting and paying attention to what they're feeling internally. But most people do a little bit of a balance of both. We don't feel good, so we look for an item or food that might make us feel better. We're feeling anxious heading into the dentist or something like that, so we text somebody. We do this almost reflexively, it's not always conscious. So infants do this, and we continue to do this. We start to now balance our interoceptive and exteroceptive focus, looking inward and looking outward. And as we do that, we're starting to figure out what gets our needs met. Remember, emotions are really there to form bonds and to make predictions. And so our needs are going to be met to some degree or not. Sometimes sadly there is neglect. Sometimes people don't show up for us the way that we would like. And in general, our responses to that have to do with whether or not we predict whether or not they would or not. When we expect something and it doesn't happen, It's a big let down. That was the discussion about dopamine last episode. So the many theories of emotion, the triune brain theory, that you have a primitive and involved brain, something that's a little bit on shaky ground these days. The idea that Darwin proposed, that there are these universal expressions of emotions. The work of Helen Fisher on love, that you have circuits in the brain for lost circuits in the brain, for love and circuits in the brain for long-term bonds, as well as the work of Lisa Feldman Barrett, saying that emotions are contextual, that they have a social component. And I'll be talking more about this, but the work of Allan Schore, a clinical psychologist and researcher at UCLA, about right brain, left brain, and its role in emotional development. All of them have strong elements of this idea of paying attention to what's going on inward and outward. As a young creature, an infant and young toddler, you were mainly focused inward, and you started to understand what was going on outward as a way of predicting what would bring you relief, what would remove your anxiety. And that's where the fundamental rules of your experience, your emotional experience were laid down. And I realized that's a lot of information and it's somewhat of an academic talk, but there were two tools in there that I just want to highlight, one is the Mood Meter app. If you're interested in, it can give you some insight into the different kinds of nuance within emotions and allow you to actually predict emotional states, if you want to try that and you might find that interesting. The other one is this idea that there are three axes two emotion, three continuum that interact, the level of alertness and calmness, how good or bad you feel, and whether or not you're mainly focused inward or outward, because those are going to form a useful tool kit for the information going forward. So now let's talk about what kind of baby you were, because that actually informs your emotionality now. These are classic. They're actually famous experiments done by Bowlby and Ainsworth. Anyone that study psychology or has taken a psychology class might have learned about this. This is this classic experiment of what was called the strange situation task in which, and I'm describing it very coarsely here, I realize. But a mother and child come into the laboratory. Yes, this is now also been done with fathers. The baby and the mother or father play together for a bit, and then the mother leaves. The mother leaves for some period of time and then comes back. And the research is devoted to understanding the response of the child when the caretaker, the mother or the father returns, most all children, not every child, but most children will cry when their primary caretaker leaves. They don't like that. And there are good reasons for that. They formed a bond and an attachment. And we will talk about some of the deeper chemical reasons for those bonds. However, the experiment is focused on the return of the caregiver. Because Bowlby and Ainsworth, and many of their scientific offspring and colleagues identified at least four patterns that babies display when their caretaker returns, and they group these into group a, b, c, d, so much so that the kids were referred to as a babies, b babies, c babies or d babies. You may know which one you were. But the categories are really interesting. The first babies are the a babies. So these were kids that would get upset when their caretaker would leave. But when their caretaker would return, the infant would respond with happiness, with what looked like delight. They would go to the caretaker. They seemed happy. If they had been fussy before or sad, they felt relieved. These are referred to as secure attached kids. So they have a healthy response to separation, and they have a healthy response to re-engaging with the caretaker. The b babies as they're called were less likely to seek comfort from their caregiver when the caregiver would return. So they would sometimes continue to play with their toys or if they had an adult in the room while the parent was gone, they would stay with them. It was sometimes complicated and nuanced, but these were referred to as avoidant babies. Don't run away with any conclusions about the language here just yet. It's not clear that avoidant babies become avoidant adults, but bear with me. The c babies would respond to the return of the caregiver with acts of annoyance. They seemed kind of angry. So it wasn't that they ignored them, they seem kind of angry. And those were referred to as ambivalent babies, not to be confused with a babies. These are the c babies, were the ambivalent babies. So the infant's reaction to the returning caregiver were inconsistent. It seemed like they wanted to bond with them again but that they seem kind of annoyed. I think we've all felt this way before with people that we care very much about, especially people we care very much about. And then the third category, the d babies, were the disorganized babies, that's what they call them. They weren't disorganized and that they were messy, the child avoided interactions with everyone and acted fearful when the caregiver returned, and their behavior didn't really change whether or not the caregiver was there or not. And that fourth category was actually added rather late in the course of this research. I should mention these experiments have been repeated with a huge variety of different contexts. There was work done by Mary Main at UC Berkeley and many others, looking at all sorts of variations on this theme. But over time, it made it clear that certain babies are able to feel secure upon re-engaging with their caregiver and others don't, or they're confused about it. So we probably don't know whether or not you were an a, b or c, d baby, unless you were in these experiments and somehow you had that knowledge. But this work, this classic work opened up a huge set of important questions that relate to what is the reestablishment of the bond really about. I mean, what's actually being figured out here is not whether or not there are four categories of babies, that's interesting, but it presumably is more interesting to focus on what is it that defines a really good bond, a secure attachment, or an insecure attachment or an avoidant attachment. And the four things are gaze. literally eye contact, and doesn't have to be direct beaming eye contact with no blinks like people have accused me of before. It can just be gaze, people look at each other, you see couples, they look at each other, they don't always stare each other long periods of time, sometimes they do. Vocalizations, so what we say and how we say it. Affect or emotion, so the way that we express it, crying, smiling et cetera, and touch, those four things. And you probably could add a fifth dimension once language and written language develops, which is written word, exchange of letters, exchange of texts, exchange of things of that sort, emails, are another way in which people can bond. But gaze, vocalization, affect and touch are really the core of this thing that we call social bonds and emotionality. Now that's important. We know for instance that there are brain areas like the fusiform face area which is deep in the brain that is responsible for the processing of faces. Children's recognition of their parents' faces and voices is extremely accurate and strong. Likewise, parents recognition of their child's vocalizations not just voices, but cries are remarkable. If you've ever had the experience of being at a party with somebody who has small children and you're talking to them, and all of a sudden they hear something but you don't, it's as if they've got wolf hearing, and all of a sudden, they go running into the other room. And indeed the kid is like, I don't know, some kid is beating up their kid or their kid's beating up some other kid, or the kid injure themselves or feels emotionally injured. This perception of voices. There's very good evidence to support the fact that we are tuned to the frequencies of voices and vocalizations of people that we care about. It's not just true in rodents and in birds and other mammals, it's definitely true in humans as well. And babies are very tuned in to the sound of their mother's voice, even, yes, while they're in the womb. There's this whole world of what's called mother-ease, which is the particular style of speech that mothers and other caretakers now we know use with children. So those are the core elements. How you look at somebody and how they look at you, what you say, what they say, what they seem to be feeling, and how that makes you feel, smiles, frowns. If you know someone really well, you can read inflections, like even little subtle things like, mm, they don't really believe me, or, oh they're really excited by this, or, oh, now I know what they're thinking. That kind of processing, some people are better at it than others, but everyone's better at doing that with people that we recognize and know. In fact, couples come to know each other exceedingly well, so much so that it can both benefit and injure their relationship to constantly be making these perceptions. But there's a range. Some people are more tuned into this than others. And that probably has roots in the sorts of attachments that you form early on. So Bowlby and colleagues develop these a, b, c, d thing. And it has a lot to do with face processing and gaze and vocalizations and touch, all of those happen on return with the mother, but they weren't parsing those, they weren't looking at them individually. So this raises a really interesting question, which is, what is it when we feel something? Is it because of something that happened spontaneously in us, it's a memory, or it's something that we realize, we saw on the internet or we got news about somebody? Nowadays people get so much information about the people they know, both the people they like and dislike by way of viewing online activities. So they're exterocepting, and then it's impacting your internal state. And it's clear from most all of the theories of emotional health, that an ability to recognize when your own internal state is being driven primarily by external events, as important for being able to emotionally regulate. People who are constantly being yanked around by the external happenings in the world, you would say are emotionally labile, they are not in control of their emotions, even if they're calm all the time, if that calmness only arrives because they're in a placid environment and then you put a cracker in that environment and they freak out, well, then they're not really calm. Their calm in so far as there isn't something disturbing in the environment. So how much the outside environment disrupts your internal environment has everything to do with this balance of interoception and an exteroception. And it very likely has roots in whether or not you were secure attached or insecure attached, disorganized or ambivalent as a baby. And of course, you can't travel back in time and know, but there are some hints as to what kind of emotionality each of us has by examining two periods of development, one is adolescence and puberty and the other is adulthood. So while we can't travel back in time, there is an exercise that you can do to address at least in this moment, whether or not you have a bias for exteroception or a bias for interoception, whether or not you are better at least in this moment, at paying attention to what's going on internally or externally. And of course, this will vary with circumstance. I think we all know people that, maybe it's you, you go to a party and you get there, and everyone seems to be talking and having a really good time, and you're wondering whether or not you have any food in your teeth or whether or not there's something on your face or whether or not your hair is right or whether or not you said something the wrong way, whether or not you're turning red. People also experience this a lot with public speaking. It's not just about learning to clamp your level of stress, it's also about how much you're exterocepting, how much you're out of your head, they call it. But how much you're focused on the events around you versus the events inside you. Actually, it's interesting when you talk to people who are very effective athletes or they have very high stress high consequence jobs, they talk about this notion of getting out of your head. You only have so much attentional resource, and it can be split between two things, you'll see that in a moment. They can be anchored to one thing. It can be fully focused on what's going on internally or it can be fully focused on what's going on externally. And if you want to be effective in the world, effective being in quotes, it is useful when in very dynamic environments, especially social environments, to have a lot of your attention focused outward as opposed to trying to pay attention to whether or not you're saying things correctly or the tambour of your own voice, that is more or less destructive for the ability to engage socially. So here's the exercise. You can do this. Please don't do this if you're driving. But let's just try and illustrate or allow you to experience this interoceptive, exteroceptive balance, and the extent to which you can move interoception and exteroception deliberately. If you close your eyes right now and concentrate on the contact of any portion of your body with say the chair or your car seat, although please, again, don't do this while you're driving, anywhere that you are, even if you're just standing up or you're in the kitchen, you're laying on the couch, and trying to bring as much of your attention to that point of contact as possible. And then from there, you're going to move your attention even more deeply into say the sensation of what's going on in your gut. Are you full? Are you empty? Are you hungry? Are you not? Is your heart beating, at what rate? What's the cadence of your breathing? Basically bringing your focus and attention to everything at the surface of your skin and inward. So I'm going to do a rare thing on the Huberman Lab Podcast. I'm going to introduce about five to eight seconds of silence in order to allow you to do that a little bit. Now this is an exercise that you can continue afterward if you want to extend how long you do this. But now try and do something that, for most people actually is a little bit harder, which is to purely exterocept, put your eyes or your ears, or both on anything in your immediate space, one thing. And I would restrict that thing to something small enough that at least in your field of view it would occupy 20% of your field of view. So it doesn't have to be a pinpoint unless the pin is right in front of you and you're holding it real close. I would say, look across the room, pick a panel on the wall or a leg of a table or something, and try and bring as much of your attention to that as possible. And again, I'll take about five seconds of silence to allow you to exterocept. So what you probably found is that you were able to do that, but that some degree of interoception is maintained. It's hard to place 100% of your attention on something externally, unless it's really exciting, really novel. If you've ever watched a really great movie, presumably you're exterocepting more than you're interoceptive until something exciting happens and then you feel something. You're actually tethering your emotional experience to something external. And now you can also do this dynamically. You can decide to focus internally and externally. You can decide to split it 50%, 50% or 70/30. You can develop a heightened ability to do this. And the power of doing that is actually that when you are in environments where you feel like you're focused too much internally and you'd like to be focused more externally, you can actually do that deliberately. But as you notice, it takes work, it involves taking your attentional spotlight, and what we call the aperture of your attention, and narrowing that aperture to either the self or something externally or splitting the two. And yet there are practices that have been developed that center on moving interoception and exteroception from one being more heavily weighted than the other, more focused outward or more focused inward. And it's dynamic. And the circuits in the brain that underlie intero and exteroception aren't exactly known, but they are anchored in the areas of the brain that are involved in attention, like the frontal eye fields and areas that when you third-person yourself, when you can see yourself doing something, like if you put your hand out in your environment and you focus on your hand, you know that that's your hand as opposed to some random object. There are areas of the brain that are involved in that, in recognizing location of self relative to the rest of your body. These exercises are really what are at the core of these development of emotional bonds. Because as we mentioned before, these four things, the gaze, vocalization, touch and affect, those are happening very dynamically. So if somebody winks at you, you're paying attention to their wink, but then you also notice how you feel. Then they might say something, then you might say something, this is very dynamic. So if it seems overwhelming to try and interocept an exterocept and then shift the balance, you do that all the time. Your brain and nervous system are fantastic at doing this. Now, some people have a very hard time breaking out of a very strongly interoceptive mode. Some people have a harder time breaking out of their exteroceptive mode. It's very interesting note the extent to which we have biases in how interoceptive or exteroceptive we are. Remember those three axes that we talked about earlier, you have valence, good or bad, you have alertness, alert or calm, and you have interoceptive or exteroceptive bias. And it's going to differ across the day, it's going to differ across the lifetime. It's certainly going to differ according to whatever it is that you're engaged in. But early in development, you start off with this interoceptive bias. You are starting to develop expectations, predictions about how the outside world is going to work. And you are trying to figure out the reliability of outside events in people. And where things are reliable, when people are reliable, we are able to give up more of our interoception. There's literally trust that our interoceptive needs our internal needs will be met through bonds and actions of others. This starts to veer toward the discussion about neglect and trauma. We are going to devote entire episodes, probably an entire month to trauma and PTSD. But those have roots in what we're talking about now. And it's important to internalize and understand what we're talking about now in order to get the most out of those future conversations. So if all of this seems like a lot of information and very complicated, I just invite you to pay attention from time to time how much you happen to be interocepting or exterocepting, because emotions and the intensity of those emotions will grow or shrink depending on how much we're interocepting. If we are feeling extremely sad, and there is an outside event that made us sad, chances are there's going to be a balance, but that the extreme grief, the extreme sadness is going to lead us to mostly interoceptive. Whereas when we're feeling extremely happy, the same is true. Something great happens in the world, and we're just going to feel it. Most of our perception, most of our awareness is going to be on our internal state. So we are always tethered to the outside world to some degree or another. That was true when you were an infant, and it was true when you were an adolescent, and it's true as an adult. So now I want to just pause, just shelve the discussion about interoception, exteroception for a moment. And I want to talk about what is arguably the second most, if not, equally important aspect of your development as it relates to emotionality and as it relates to this, what I call trust, but this ability to predict whether or not things in the outside world are reliable or not reliable in terms of their ability to help you meet your interoceptive needs. And that period is puberty. So up until now, we've been talking mainly about psychology, not a lot of biology, not a lot of mechanism. And now we're going to transition into talking about mechanism, hormones, receptors, et cetera. Puberty is a absolute biological event. It has a beginning, and it has a specific definition, which is the transition into reproductive maturity. So there are a lot of hormonal changes. Yes, there are also a lot of brain changes. And most people don't realize it, but the brain changes occur first. The brain turns on the hormone systems that allow puberty to occur. Puberty is occurring earlier nowadays than it did in the past. The current numbers that I was able to find is that in females and girls, the transition is starting around age 10, whereas in boys, it's about age 12, that's going to differ by way of a number of different factors. Those are averages. So it depends on where you are in the world, depends on all sorts of things. One of the primary triggers for puberty is actually body fat. This is interesting. The peptide hormone, leptin, some people call it a peptide, some people call it a hormone, but it meets both definitions depending on how you look at it, is made by fat. So leptin had a lot of popularity in the '90s, because it was discovered as being produced by fat, and it was seen in animal studies that it could promote leanness. It actually communicates to the brain that there's enough body fat in order to allow the metabolic factors and processes to occur to liberate more fat. This is why people have trouble losing that last five pounds. It's because leptin levels are very low. This was actually the basis for the whole cheat day, refeed thing, that the idea was if you eat a lot for one day a week while dieting hard, that you can signal to the brain that there's enough leptin. I don't know if that's the reason or whether or not the cheat days just provided some psychological relief, probably both. But in any case, leptin is made by body fat. And when there's enough leptin, it signals the brain to trigger puberty. There was a paper published in the mid '90s in the Journal Science, excellent journal, showing that leptin could be injected into younger females that would not have yet gone into puberty. And you could accelerate the onset of puberty with leptin. So more body fat, the earlier puberty, that's true. Leptin is also involved in various growth effects in the body generally. And it's interesting, very obese children don't necessarily undergo puberty earlier. Sometimes they do, but they do tend to be larger boned. Their bones actually grow more quickly, and they tend to have higher bone density because leptin is also involved in bone density. The whole issue of onset of puberty also has some really interesting social effects. And I want to really highlight that most of these effects, also called pheromone effects. Remember a hormone is a substance secreted from one area of the body, travels, and impacts tissues and cells elsewhere in the body. A pheromone is a chemical that's released by one member of a species that goes and acts on and impacts other members of that species or even other species. So for instance, rodents are very good at detecting the urine and the scent markings of large carnivores that want to eat them. So that's a pheromone interaction. Whether or not they're pheromonal effects in humans is very debated. I did a post on this on Instagram a little while ago about some pheromone effects that were reported in humans. And I had a couple of people come at me saying, "Look, it's never really been shown in humans that there's a pheromonal vomer," what's called the vomeronasal organ. There's something called Jacobson's organ. It's rudimentary. Some people have it, some people don't, very controversial. So I want to point out that human pheromone effects are controversial. Although I think there's, in my opinion, there's ample evidence for them, synchronization of menstrual cycles. Many people report, then people say there's some studies that show that it's not true. Then there've been some data showing very impressive pheromonal effects of female partners being able to detect the odor of their significant others on t-shirts that were washed several times. So they can't consciously perceive it, but they say this one smells like them, this one smells like my partner. And indeed, the match was way above chance. So there does seem to be weak pheromonal effects at least in my opinion when I look at the data, but much more needs to be done. So one of the more interesting pheromone effects that impacts puberty, at least in animal models is the so-called Vandenbergh effect, which is, if you take a pre-pubertal female, so a female that has not undergone sexual maturation, and you introduce a novel male that is not the father or a brother, not a sibling, she will undergo puberty almost immediately. So this is really striking. For years, this was thought not to occur in primate species, but there was a paper published last year in Current Biology, Cell Press journal, excellent journal, showing that mandrills, a particular type of primate, they exhibit this Vandenbergh effect. There are also all sorts of other pheromone effects. There's the most infamous one is called the Bruce effect, where the introduction of a novel male to a pregnant female animal causes spontaneous miscarriage. And that effect seems to be protected against by the presence of the father. This interpretation of this, and I want to really highlight that these are animal studies, but the way this works is that if a pregnant female is in the company of the male that impregnated her, then her young are protected by his scent presence or his pheromone presence. But if he's gone and a novel male shows up, there's a tendency for her to spontaneously miscarry, and essentially for the fetus to be lost. Now, whether or not this occurs in humans is still very controversial, but nonetheless, these pheromone effects exist. And that one is called the Bruce effect, named after Hilda Bruce, who is the scientist that discovered it. The one that's relevant to the puberty discussion is the Vandenbergh effect, which I mentioned a few minutes ago, which is a novel male showing up, has to be a sexually competent male, so he has to have already passed through puberty, and his presence triggers activation of puberty in a female that otherwise would have remained pre-pubertal for longer. Again, whether or not this happens in humans is unclear. Well, what can we be sure about when we think about puberty? Puberty is triggered by a number of different factors. There are changes in GABA expression in the brain, an inhibitory transmitter. One of the more interesting molecules that triggers puberty in all individuals is something called kisspeptin, K-I-S-S-P-E-P-T-I-N, kisspeptin. Kisspeptin is made by the brain. And it stimulates large amounts of all different hormone called GnRH, gonadotrophin-releasing hormone to be released. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone then causes the release of another hormone called luteinizing hormone or LH, which travels in the bloodstream and stimulates the ovaries of females to produce estrogen and the testes of males to produce testosterone. Kisspeptin has other effects as well. But those are some of the main ones as they relate to puberty. This is interesting, because at this point, the testes in males start churning out tons of testosterone in order to trigger the development of secondary sexual characteristics, body hair and all the others, deepening of voice, et cetera. And in females, estrogen is doing various other things, breast development, et cetera. Normally, in an adult, somebody who has passed puberty, a big increase in gonadotropin releasing hormone and luteinizing hormone would eventually be shut down, because the way that the brain works, the hypothalamus and the pituitary are actually measuring how much hormone is in the blood. And if testosterone or estrogen or any other hormone goes too high, they shut down the release of things like luteinizing hormone. It's called a negative feedback loop. Basically is like a thermostat in the house. It's more complicated than that, but once levels get too high in the blood stream, it shuts down. But kisspeptin is able to drive very high levels of these hormones in an ongoing way so that puberty can commence and can continue. And incidentally, kisspeptin has now become yet another of the panoply of hormones and peptides and cocktails that athletes take in order to try and stimulate natural hormone production, essentially to create their own performance-enhancing drugs endogenously. No judgment there, but that's a fact, there's a lot of kisspeptin used. I truly not suggesting anyone do this, but people are buying and injecting kisspeptin for the specific reason that even past puberty can stimulate the large increases in things like estrogen, large increases in testosterone and things of that sort. Has a number of psychological effects too, seems to have big effects on libido, et cetera. All these things of course are subject to feedback loops, so they don't work indefinitely. And I'm going to highlight, again, I'm not suggesting anyone do it, but I do like to pay attention to what's out there. And kisspeptin, because it wasn't discovered that long ago is one of the things that you don't often hear about when people talk about performance-enhancing drugs or therapeutic endocrinology. These things also have therapeutic uses in the endocrine setting. So for instance, kids that don't undergo puberty or kids that are hypogonadal or adults that are hypogonadal, they're not making enough hormone will take things like kisspeptin among other things. So that's how puberty happens at the biological level, gets triggered by leptin and kisspeptin. And then this young child is now a different creature to to some extent, not just because they're reproductively competent, of course, but because there's a shift in a number of the things that underlie these social bonds, there's a market shift in a number of the things that allow children and adults to engage in predictive behavior about each other. And the whole nature of adolescence and puberty is to take a child that was a generalist and to make them a specialist. And this is very important as it relates to the conversation about emotionality. But it's important in terms of aspects of brain function and in terms of learning and in terms of who each and every one of us will and has become. In adolescents and in childhood, sure, there are some genetic biases, hair color, eye color, height, and things like that. A lot of that's programmed into the genome. There are other genetic biases too of course, that we inherit. But it's in adolescents in puberty that we go from essentially being somewhat good at a bunch of things or somewhat poor at a bunch of things, to be coming very good at a few things and very poor at a lot of other things. And that's because of the relationship to puberty and neuroplasticity, this ability to change the brain in response to experience is starting to taper off such that by our early 20s, it's harder to achieve. Now, the transition from generalist to specialist is one aspect of adolescence and puberty, but the other is the formation of social and emotional bonds. And most of what consumes the minds and waking hours of adolescents and children who have gone through puberty and going through puberty is questions about how they relate to social structures, who they can rely on, and how they can make reliable predictions in the world, now that they have more urgency that they are physically changed. In fact, you could argue that puberty is the fastest rate of maturation that you'll go through at any point in your life. It's the largest change that you'll go through at any point in your life in terms of who you are, because your biology has fundamentally changed at the level of your brain and your bodily organs, all your organs from the skin inward. So I want to visit a little bit of the research about some of the core needs that occurred during puberty and adolescence, not just for parents or for the people that might be in puberty and adolescence, but also so that people can reflect on which of the sort of boxes were checked off for them as they approached emotional maturity. So there's a terrific review article that was published in the journal Nature, which is, if not the premier, then certainly among the top three premier journals in the field of science about the biology of adolescence and puberty, as well as some of the core needs and demands that have to be met for successful emotional maturation during that time. We will provide a link to that, but I just want to highlight a few of the things that they place in the final table. I don't want to go through all the results right now, because you could do that on your own if you like. They mainly highlight a lot of the changes in neurons and neural circuits. For instance, I'll just highlight one, there's a connection between the dopamine centers in the brain and an area of the brain that's involved in emotion and dispersal. Dispersal is very interesting. What you observe in animals and humans is that around the end of adolescence and during the transition to puberty, both because of changes in the brain and changes in hormones there's an intense desire on the part of the child to get further and further away from primary caregivers, not permanently, they always return, similar to a child that walks off and then looks back and sees if everything's safe and then continues on. During adolescence and puberty, both in animals and in kids, it almost seems like there's a bias for action, and the action is always in a direction away from the primary caregiver. Now, as soon as I say that, I can just imagine in my mind that somebody out there saying, "Well, no, my kid as soon as they hit puberty, they just want to stay home with us all the time." That's not typical. It happens, but it's not typical. Mostly there's a desire to start spending more time with friends, more time with peers and less time with adults. And I find it extremely interesting to note that that's not just true in humans, that's true in other primate species. That's true in rodents. That's true in almost every other mammalian species. So there's something about these hormones that don't just allow sexual reproduction. They don't just change the brain and bodily organs and the shape of us, they also bias us towards dispersal, getting further and further away from primary caregivers in particular. So parents of teenagers or future teenagers, it is not just normal, it is baked in to the biology of humans to disperse around adolescents and in the teen years. So again, I just want to highlight a few of these, what were listed as intervention strategies to promote healthy adolescence and puberty. It's very interesting because the entire article, I should mention who wrote this article, apologies. One of them is a friend of mine. So the first author is Ronald Dahl, not the children's book author, I'm assuming, no, from the School of Public Health at University of California, Berkeley and Nicholas Allen, Linda Wilbert and Anna Balanoff Suliman, forgive me for the pronunciation of the last one. I know Dr. Wilbert quite well. She's done the work on dispersal, is quite well known for that work, and it's a very extensive review, but I think you'll find it accessible. A lot of changes and thickness of the brain at different stages, et cetera. But I think most people will be interested in what that translates to in the real world. And what's interesting is during puberty, there's increased connection, connectivity as we call it between the prefrontal cortex, which is involved in motivation and decision-making, being able to suppress action for making long-term goals possible, as well as dopamine centers and the amygdala. So there's this really broad integration and testing. I think this is the key element here, testing of circuits for emotions and reward as they relate to decisions. And I think that's useful because when you look at the behavior of adolescents and teens, they are testing social interactions, they are testing physical interactions with the world. Oftentimes they're engaging in unsafe behavior. I would never try and justify that with the underlying neurology, but the neuroscience points to increased connectivity between areas of the brain that are related to emotionality and to threat detection like the amygdala, but also reward. So it's a time of testing behaviorally how different behaviors lead to success or not. It's how different behaviors lead to fear states or not. Now, of course you could say that of any stage of development, but it seems like puberty is a very, very heightened stage in which testing of contingencies, good or bad is taking place. And of course it's operating in a body that's now more capable than the infant. So an infant can damage themselves through error, but it's harder for them to damage themselves through deliberate planning. That's why it's important of course, to lock up all the medications in the house, make sure infants can't get to them, but it's not likely that the infant is going to devise an extremely diabolical plan to get into the cabinet to get a certain substance. Whereas a teenager might. So you can start to map the neurology onto some of this emotional exploration. I do realize that this episode is about emotions. Puberty is a time in which the internal state of the person or the animal is being sampled and tested against different exteroceptive events, only now they are able to guide those events with more urgency. It's no longer just about whether or not the caregiver is bringing you milk or bringing you food. Now, of course, the parents will all say, "Yeah, but I'm paying for everything that they're doing. I'm paying for the car and I'm paying for the food." Ah, true. But the biology doesn't care about the source, the child or the adolescent is now able, the teen really, is able to now sample many, many more exteroceptive events through behavior. So some of these recommendations are interesting. The theory is that one of the motivations is to learn to mitigate the risk of famine and malnutrition. As teenagers get older, they start questioning whether or not their parents are everything they thought they were, whether or not they're the greatest thing that ever was or the worst thing that ever was, perhaps. Including whether or not they will be able to provide them resources. So they test whether or not they can actually feed themselves, whether or not they can support themselves. Although rarely not, certainly it happens, but rarely are they really taking care of themselves. Although some teens are forced to take care of themselves of course, because parents and other caretakers aren't available. The recommendations that map to the biology include, there's been a big push for later start times in schools to match their shifts in circadian rhythms and the need for extended sleep. Something we talked about during the sleep episodes. To insist on sleep interventions for youth who are at increased risk for mental health problems. Almost every mental health issue is supported by getting regular quality sleep of sufficient duration. Sufficient duration is going to vary from person to person. Leveraging different kinds of social relationships that reinforce positive behavior. This is starting to sound like kind of a boiler plate stuff. And yet, really the goal is during puberty to encourage as many safe forms of interaction that allow children, teens, really and adolescents, I keep calling them children, but what I mean are children going through puberty, that allow them to test this thing of autonomy so that they can start to make good assessments about their exteroceptive events that they are selecting and how those make them feel internally. So they're essentially doing a buffet. The buffet has now broadened to not just include the events and experiences that their parents and other caretakers bring them, but they can now expand the buffet into things that they can provide themselves. And so adolescence and puberty is really seen as the period of development in which one self-samples for these two elements that we talked about at the beginning, which are, how do I form bonds and how do I make predictions about what will make me feel good at a level of interoception. Some of that might sound a little transactional, that all we're trying to do is figure out how we can bond with people so we can get what we need so we can feel how we need. I think that's true to some extent, of course, there's a richer, more abstract aspect to relationships too, which are, in relationships you can access things you couldn't do before, you can cooperate. There's things like teamwork. You can do all sorts of things. But in terms of the biology, it's clear that there's this stage of development where more autonomy, more physical capability is triggered by these hormone changes in the brain, and these peptide changes in the brain and body. And that nonetheless brings us back to the exact same model that we started with in infancy, of alert or calm, feel good or feel bad, primarily exterocepting, primarily interocepting. So I keep going back to this, I'm sort of like a repeating record on that, because the same core algorithm, the same core function is at play throughout the lifespan. And that's a useful framework in my opinion, because it allows you to sort through all the data and information that's out there about, well, this area, the astria terminalis is active or the basal lateral amygdala is active or gray matter thickening or this hormone or that hormone, and return to a kind of kernel of certainly not exhaustive truth, it doesn't cover all aspects of emotionality, but at least establishes some groundwork from which you can start to evaluate how different behaviors might or might not make sense, how certain emotional responses might or might not make sense, regardless of the age of the person or the organism. A discussion about emotions would not be complete without talking about the right brain, left brain stuff. And this is a very interesting aspect of sociology, psychology and neuroscience. There's a theory of emotional development that I find particularly interesting, which is from Allan Schore at UCLA, that talks about how most of our testing of bonds and relationships is this seesawing back and forth between very dopaminergic, so driven by dopamine or serotonergic, driven by serotonin states. And this starts with infant and mother or infant and father. I talked a little bit about this in the previous episode, but just to remind you, or for anyone that didn't hear about it, that during development, healthy emotional development clearly begins with an ability for the caretaker and child to be in calm, peaceful, soothing, touch-oriented, eye gazing type of behaviors. Those really drive serotonin, the endogenous opioid system, oxytocin, things are very calming and are centered around pleasure with the here and now, as well as excited states of what we're going to do next. There's actually a characteristic sign of the dopaminergic interaction, where both caretaker and child are wide-eyed, the pupils dilate. That's a signature of arousal. They get really excited. Oftentimes the baby will look away if it gets really excited those are signatures of dopamine release in the body, and in adolescents, these same things carry forward, where their good bonds are achieved through hanging around, watching TV, playing video games or texting together or talking, whatever it is that the soothing local activity happens to be, as well as adventure and things that are exciting, so it could be sports, it could be shopping, it could be a summer adventure. It could be the next big thing. And so this kind of seesawing back and forth between the different reward systems seems to be the basis from which healthy emotional bonds are created. And I invite anyone who's interested in this to look up some of Dr. Schore's work. I think I misspoke on the last episode. He's not a psychiatrist, he's a clinical psychologist and psychoanalyst, but has deep routings in neuroscience. So I think a fascinating aspect. But the way it's framed in his book and in some of the language around right brain, left brain. And we've all heard this stuff before, that the right brain is thought to be the emotional side. This is the characteristic thing that you hear out there. That the right brain is holistic, that it's emotive, and that the left brain is logical, sequential and analytic. And that's not what Schore was proposing. There are some right brain, left brain differences. But the idea that the right brain is synthetic, holistic and emotive, and that the left brain is logical, sequential and analytic is false. There is zero neuroscience evidence for that whatsoever. We're going to address this in more detail during a month talking about learning and memory and dementia, but let's talk about some truths, some differences between the left brain and right brain, because we can't have a discussion about emotion without doing that. The left brain, at least for people who are right-handed is linguistically dominant. Meaning, most of language is centered in the left side of the brain for right-handed people. If you are a left-hander and you were forced to become right-handed, chances are this is still true, because of when language gets laid down in the brain. For left-handers, people that naturally write with their left hand and always did, language is still mostly in the left side of the brain, but it's also found more often in the right side of the brain. So it's not as lateralized as we say, it's kind of distributed between both. So right-handers, most of your language is coming from the left side of your brain. Left-handers, it's probably a little bit more evenly distributed. And there are some variations, whether or not you're a hook righty or a hook lefty, there's all sorts of nuance to this, but that's the general aspect. So language tends to be centered in the left side of the brain. And that includes lexicon, grammar, syntax, all of it, except for one. And we'll talk about one aspect of language that seems to be more right brain. That's very interesting. There does seem to be some arithmetic advantage. So ability in math in the left side of the brain. And I'm going to talk about how all this was discovered in a minute. And the right brain, however, is linguistically primitive. Most people don't realize this because the right brain is always described as the emotive side, it's super emotional and holistic, but it's actually linguistically primitive. And there's a way that that's been teased out through experiment. It's very good at manipulating spatial things and visual spatial tasks. It's primarily handling that stuff, but it sort of non-language except one aspect. And there isn't a ton of evidence for this, but the evidence is strong, which is prosody. Prosody is the LILting and falling of language. So a good example would be Italian. I don't speak Italian. I only know a little bit of Italian, but the most of the Italian I know is when my Italian colleagues have said to me, [speaks in foreign language], which means like what are you trying to say, what are you saying? I think I'm getting that right. Basically they're saying I don't speak Italian, which is true. Or because one of them knows I loves Costello very much, they always say [speaks in foreign language], which means big, lazy guy, which accurately captures Costello. So even those few examples, [speaks in foreign language], there's a lot of LILt and fall in Italian, other languages, not so much. And it varies by language. One of the reasons I find Italian so beautiful, not the Italian I speak, but the Italian that other people speak so beautiful to listen to that that prosody and the shifts in intonation are really quite remarkable. It's almost like a singing song listening to them speak. And I used to like to go to scientific meetings. And I always hang out with the Italians, 'cause I had some good friends in Italian labs, but also 'cause they always knew where the best food was, their standards for food are incredible. They would rather starve than eat terrible pasta, and the pasta they do find and that they're willing to eat is always fantastic. But in addition to that, they always brought a guitar. They were a lot more fun than a lot of my other colleagues to hang out with at meetings. So in any event, the right brain is doing things that are more about manipulating spatial information. And I'll talk about this more in a future episode. This was discovered in split-brain patients, the people that lack connection between the two sides of the brain, this had to be teased out through very complicated experiments. People like Roger Sperry who won a Nobel Prize for this, who was at Caltech, Mike Gazzaniga and others figured out these lateralized differences. but let's just try and demolish the myth that the right side is synthetic and holistic and emotive, and that the left side is logical, sequential, and analytic, that you're a left brain person or a right brain person. Nothing could be further from the truth. There's no scientific evidence to support that. And there's a few lesion studies that can tease out effects that make you think that's what's happening, but the really careful work points in a totally different direction. We can't have a complete conversation about emotions and bonds and social connection without talking about oxytocin. Oxytocin has come to such prominence in the last decade or so, and seems to be everywhere. Anytime you hear a discussion about neuroscience in the brain or hormones in the brain, oxytocin is released in response to lactation in females, it is released in response to sexual interactions. It is released in response to non-sexual touch. It's released in males and females, and indeed it's involved in pair bonding and the establishment of social bonds in general. How it does that seems to be by matching internal state. It seems to both increase synchrony of internal state somehow, maybe it sets a level of calmness or alertness. That seems like a reasonable hypothesis, as well as raising people's awareness for the emotional state of their partner. And again, this brings us back to this alertness calmness axis and this interoceptive, exteroceptive axis. In order to form good bonds, we can't just be thinking about how we feel, we also need to be paying attention to how others feel, and we're evaluating a match. We're trying to see whether or not there seems to be some sort of synchrony between states. And oxytocin, both seems to increase that synchrony and increase awareness for the emotional state of others. Now I know many of you are probably screaming mirror neurons, mirror neurons. Mirror, neurons, as some of you may know, and some of you perhaps may not, are neurons that were discovered in animals and humans for their ability to respond when people engage in certain physical actions like lifting of a pen, but the same neurons would respond when somebody watched someone else lift a pen. So they were really mirrors of, were representing mirrors of behavior, both in self and in others. Mirror neurons are very controversial. There are many neuroscientists who I respect a lot, who don't think they exist, because they look at the data, and the data, at least in their mind were over interpreted in the realm of empathy and in assigning value to the emotional states of others. And when I look at the literature, my opinion is that indeed there are neurons in the brain that clearly represent the actions of others, but it's not clear that they're wired into the emotion and empathy system in any direct way. And I think the growing consensus is that mirror neurons, while the name is terrific and it's so catchy, and encompasses so much of what you would love for it to encompass, but that the data don't really support that. But this is controversial, and I'm perfectly happy to get experts on here that could debate it better than I could. There are however neurons in the brain that were discovered by my colleague, Keren Haroush at Stanford when she was working in Noam Ziv's Lab, that clearly point to the fact that primate species are making assumptions and are trying to predict the behavior of other members of their species. It's an experiment, I don't have time to go into in real detail, we should probably just get Keren on here. For those of you that are familiar with the prisoner's dilemma, which is really a model of cooperation, you can either cooperate or one member of a given interaction can cooperate and the other one won't, where you can both not cooperate. There are ways in which you can solve this, so-called prisoner's dilemma, by looking at previous behavior and making predictions about the likely next behavior that the other individual will engage in. And there do seem to be neurons that are doing these sorts of predictions or computations. Again, I'll go into this in more detail in the future. So rather than thinking about mirror neurons, like neurons for empathy, I think it's more correct to think about neurons that are trying to predict the behavior of others. And that's, as we said, one of the core features of emotions, which are to establish bonds, and through those bonds, to be able to predict behavior. So oxytocin is one component of this ability to predict others' behavior and to guide our own behavior. So here's some experiments that involve the administration of intranasal oxytocin. Now I think you need a prescription, although in some places you don't. There are people who are taking intranasal oxytocin in order to try and increase the depth of bonding. And I don't recommend you do that. I've never tried that. Whatever oxytocin I've released, I've made without an intranasal exogenous application. But what's been reported is increased positive communication among couples. So people have taken intranasal oxytocin in studies. So that study, for those of you like, was published in Biological Psychiatry, which my psychiatry colleagues tell me is a fine journal. And the title is intranasal oxytocin increases positive communication and reduces the stress hormone cortisol levels during couple conflict, they have them fight, or they have them fight with and without oxytocin. So interesting. Very much in line with the idea that oxytocin is the "trust hormone." That's sort of in keeping with that. That was a 2009 paper. There's other evidence, for instance, that men report a greater sense of connection and intimacy with their partners during sex after taking intranasal oxytocin. There are studies in autistic children. Giving them intranasal oxytocin as a way to try and help them establish better social connection and "empathy" or theory of mind. I've talked about theory of mind before, were understanding of what other children and adults are experiencing. Oxytocin does seem to create these general effects, and how nuanced they are in one situation or another, I don't know. I'm aware and I was told, and I'm definitely not recommending this, that there's a marketed oxytocin ketamine nasal spray. Now I have no idea. Maybe someone can put in the comments why you'd want to combine oxytocin and ketamine. I can't imagine why. Ketamine is a dissociative anesthetic that's used for the treatment of PTSD. It used to be used as a recreational drug. It's very similar to PCP, seems quite dangerous in fact. I don't know why those two things would be combined, why one would want to combine them. But there are products out there that seem to combine those two things. And I'm not certain why one would do that, but it's interesting to note that it's happening. A particularly interesting study about oxytocin is that, that was published in the journal, Neuroscience, which is a good journal, that oxytocin modulates social distance between males and females. So that's interesting. What they did is they gave oxytocin to people that were in monogamous relationships, and then they evaluated the extent to which the, in this case, the males in those relationships would pay attention to visual attention to attractive other potential partners. And it seemed like that the general takeaway from this study is that oxytocin administration seemed to promote monogamous behavior. So behavior that wasn't in line with monogamy of the relationship that they were in as opposed to a foraging for potentially new mates. Now of course, these are somewhat artificial experiments or very artificial experiments, depending on how you interpret them. But the general theme is that oxytocin is promoting monogamy, it's promoting pair bonding, it's promoting a understanding of the internal state of others, which requires enhanced exteroception for those particular others. So not just generally having them look everywhere and see what's going on in the world, but particularly paying attention to the emotional states of others. I'm sure several of you will be asking, "Well, what can I do to increase oxytocin," if that's your goal. There's some evidence. And I invite you again to go to examine.com or another such site like PubMed if you want to forage PubMed, that vitamin D is required for proper production, and in some cases can increase levels of oxytocin when supplemented, which is interesting. And that believe it or not, melatonin, or old friend melatonin, which I have pushed back against as a supplement for sleep, because of what I view as untoward side effects of melatonin in most cases, but it seems like melatonin in some cases can prime the system for slightly increased oxytocin release. There's even one report, although it didn't look that strong to me that low doses of caffeine could increase oxytocin release. But that to me falls under the category of what was once described as a drug when injected into a person or animal is always effective at producing a scientific paper. Meaning that you can get a result, but the result isn't always so robust. So you always want to read past the titles and the abstracts and get into the meat of the paper. And when I did that, the effects were pretty negligible with caffeine on oxytocin. But it's interesting that vitamin D and melatonin may have some positive effects on oxytocin release. But like I said, many people are just taking oxytocin directly through these intranasal sprays. I'm pretty sure it's prescription in most places, but check. And again, I'm not recommending anybody do that. I've never tried it. I don't know that I will. I think I'm going to stick with the oxytocin that I've got. The other molecule that we make that's extremely important for social bonds and emotionality is one that we're going to talk about more in the month on hormones, that's vasopressin. Vasopressin suppresses urination. It's made by the body, but it was developed as a treatment for something called diabetes insipidus, where people urinate excessively, and they actually risk dehydration and they can lose a lot of electrolytes, et cetera. So it causes water retention. Alcohol consumption inhibits vasopressin. So large amounts of alcohol, many people excrete, a lot of fluid and so forth. Vasopressin has effects on the brain directly. It actually creates feelings of giddy love. It also increases memory in very potent ways. There's a whole biohacking community that has been dabbling with vasopressin for some time. I have never tried it. I certainly don't recommend it. It is prescription. It is a pretty serious compound to start messing with, because it has so many different effects in the body. It's interesting because it creates the sense of giddy love. It's also used somewhat as an aphrodisiac, so it's similar to oxytocin. It also has very interesting effects on monogamous or non-monogamous behavior. This, again, we will revisit in the future. But there's a beautiful set of experiments that have been done in a little rodent species called a prairie vole. It turns out there are two different populations of prairie voles, some are monogamous, they always meet with the same other prairie vole, and some are very robustly non-monogamous, they mate with as many other prairie voles as they can. And turns out that levels of vasopressin and/or vasopressin receptor dictate whether or not they're monogamous or not. And there's actually some interesting evidence in humans. When people report their behavior, assuming they're reporting accurately, that vasopressin and vasopressin levels can relate to monogamy or non-monogamy in humans as well. We're going to talk about this in the month on hormones. If we're talking about the neuroscience of emotions, we have to talk about the vagus nerve. I described what the vagus nerve is in a previous episode, that it's these connections between the body and the viscera, including the gut, the heart, the lungs and the immune system and the brain, and that the brain is also controlling these organs. So it's a two-way street. There's this big myth out there that I mentioned before, that stimulating the vagus in various ways leads to calmness. That it's always going to calm you down. And that is false. I just want to repeat that is completely false. In fact, it was just paper, yet another paper published the other day, which is fantastic, which is from David McCormick Lab up at the University of Oregon. It's published in Current Biology, excellent journal, showing, I'm just reading the title, vagus nerve stimulation induces widespread cortical, the neocortex and behavioral activation. I've read the paper, it's fantastic. It illustrates yet again, stimulation of the vagus increases dopamine release, increases activation of the brain alertness. It is a stimulant of alertness, it is not calming people down. Now this is interesting in light of emotionality because of work that's been done by many groups, but in particular, I'm going to focus on the work of a colleague of mine, Karl Deisseroth at Stanford, who's a psychiatrist, but has also developed a lot of tools to adjust the activity of neurons in real time using light and electrical stimulation and so forth. I'll refer you to an article in the New Yorker that was published about this a few years ago I'm going to read a brief excerpt. I'll put the link in the caption as well. He's talking to an extremely suicidal depressed patient who has a small device implanted that allows her to adjust her vagus nerve activity. Now vagus stimulation was originally developed for the treatment of epilepsy. It's now being used for various other purposes. Vagus stimulation can even increase plasticity, it seems. So again, increasing activity of the vagus increases alertness, and it's just incredible to see what happens in real time to emotionality when the vagus is stimulated, again, not calming, but activating alertness. They're in his office and they're talking, and he asks her how she's doing, and she describes how she's been doing previously as "going pancake," which for her just means totally laid out flat, not much going on. She talks about how she doesn't want to pursue a job. She's really depressed. And he says in typical good psychiatrist fashion, "Well, that's a lot to think about," that's actually the quote. And they talk about her blood pressure, et cetera. And then she says, mood's been down, just spiraling down, talks about insomnia, bad dreams, low appetite. So this is severe depression. This is what we call major depression. And then she requests, "Can we please go up to 1.5 on vagus stimulation?" She'd been receiving 1.2 milli amps of stimulation every five minutes to 30 seconds but was no longer able to feel the effects. So he says, "Okay, I think we can go up a little, you're tolerating things well." They start the stimulation and, "In the course of the next few minutes," her name was Sally, "underwent a remarkable change, her frown disappeared. She became cheerful, describing the pleasure she'd had during the Christmas holiday and recounting how she'd recently watched some YouTube videos of Deisseroth. She was still smiling and talking when the session ended, and they walked out to the reception area." So this is just by stimulating and activating the vagus. Now why am I bringing this up? Well, for several reasons, one is the vagus is fascinating in terms of the brain body connection, two, I'd like to, trying to dispel the myth that vagus stimulation is all about being calm, it's really about being alert. I don't know how that originally got going backwards, but it's about being alert. And once again, level of alertness or level of calmness is impacting emotion, that this axis of alertness and calmness is one primary axis in emotion. It's not the only one, because there's also this valence component of good or bad. Those two aren't the only ones, because there's also this component of interoceptive, exteroceptive that we talked about earlier. And there will be others too. Again, it's not exhaustive. But I find it fascinating, and it really brings us back to where we started, which is what are the core elements of emotion, and what can you do about them? And before we close up today, I just want to make sure that even though I've mentioned some tools, I talked about the Mood Meter app, I talked about oxytocin and some of the things that impact oxytocin, I talked about some of the ways that you can conceptualize emotions. This business of how you conceptualize emotions is really the most powerful tool you can ever have in terms of understanding and regulating your emotional state. If you're willing to try and wrap your head around it, I realize it's not the simplest thing to do. But rather than think of emotions as just these labels, happy, sad, or depressed, thinking about emotions, excuse me, as elements of the brain and body that encompass levels of alertness that include a dynamic with the outside world and your perception of your internal state. And starting to really think about emotions in a structured way cannot only allow you to understand some of the pathology of when you might feel depressed or anxious or others are depressed and anxious, but also to develop a richer emotional experience to anything. Now of course, I don't expect that as you're out there interacting with friends and you're watching TV and experiencing life, that you should be parsing every bit of your experience in some sort of reductionist and mechanistic way. That's not the goal here. But for those of you that are practitioners, teachers of any kind, for those of you that are kids, for those of you that are trying to understand what your emotional life and your consciousness, dare I say the word, really consists of, I do believe that these are fundamental elements that are well-supported by the science across a variety of researchers doing things from a variety of different perspectives and some of whom agree with one another and some of whom don't. So I offer it to you as a source of knowledge from which you can start to think about your emotional life differently, I hope, as well as others in a way that builds more richness into that experience, not that detracts from it. One last point as it relates to that, many of you have asked me about psychedelic therapies that are now emerging, things like psilocybin and MDMA, we are of course going to dive into that topic deeply. We have an expert guest coming on to discuss that topic. Those compounds clearly affect the aspects of emotionality that we were talking about today, calmness, alertness, valence, good or bad, interoceptive, exteroceptive positioning. And so rather than just do a kind of cursory exploration of those compounds and what the therapeutic and scientific community is thinking about them and how they function, I think it's more important to embed that framework in our thinking so that when we address psychedelics and we address other sorts of therapies, cognitive behavioral therapy, different types of emotive therapies that relate to individuals and couples et cetera, that we are able to think about them with some sort of structure and rigor rather than just talk about them as a bunch of chemicals that produce these amazing experiences that people need to tell you about. Because if there's one truth, it seems that psychedelic seem to promote activity of storytelling about psychedelic experience. But that itself is not really what the therapeutic community and the academic communities are interested in, they're interested in trying to understand the universal truths, the universal biological shifts and psychological shifts that occur in the clinical use of those compounds. And so we're going to hold off for now, but we will get to them. Once again, we've covered an enormous amount of material today. It's really the equivalent of two if not three university lectures in one podcast episode. I want to thank those of you that have supported the podcast and point to ways in which all of you can support the podcast. Many of these are cost-free. The first is to please subscribe on YouTube and as well to hit the notifications button so that when we release new videos, which typically is every Monday for the full length episodes, but we also know how short clips, that you'll be notified. As well if you could subscribe on Apple and Spotify, and leave us a review on Apple. You have the opportunity to leave us a five-star review if you think we deserve a five-star review. Please tell your friends and family and co-workers about the podcast if you think the material would be of interest and informative for them, and if you want to send them links, that's terrific too. We also have a Patreon account. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. And there you can support us at any level that you like. In addition, if you could check out our sponsors, we always provide links to those sponsors in the captions. That's the best way to support the podcast. And several of you have asked about supplements. I talk about supplements in various episodes. We've partnered with Thorne because we think Thorne has the very highest levels of stringency in terms of the purity of the contents and the amounts of the contents. They really put in the bottle what's listed on the bottle, which is not true for a lot of supplement companies. If you want to see the supplements that I take, as well as get a discount on those or any of the other supplements that Thorne makes, you can go to thorne.com/u/huberman, and you can get 20% off any of those supplements or any of the other supplements that Thorne makes. So that's Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E dotcom slash the letter U slash Huberman to get 20% off any supplements that Thorne makes. And last but certainly not least, I want to thank you for your time and attention. And thank you for your interest in science.

========================================

--- Video 336 ---
Video ID: PZ-GvIOhcf8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PZ-GvIOhcf8
Title: How to Control Stress in Real-Time | Huberman Lab Quantal Clip
Published: 2021-03-24 13:00:06 UTC
Description:
Here I describe direct biological connections between our breathing, our brain and our heart rate. This can be used to quickly de-stress or to increase energy and alertness. 

#HubermanLab #Stress

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English (United States)
[MUSIC] - An ability to control your levels of stress in real time is extremely powerful. It turns out you can do this using physiology and neuroscience. Your breathing can directly impact your heart rate and your level of stress or calm. Here's how it works. When you inhale your diaphragm moves down. This creates more space in your thoracic cavity and your heart actually gets a little bit bigger. As a consequence the rate of blood flow through that larger heart volume slows down. A signal is sent from a group of neurons on your heart called the sinoatrial node. That signal goes up to the brain and your brain sends a signal to speed the heart up. In other words, inhaling speed your heart rate up. The opposite is true as well. When you exhale, your diaphragm moves up. Your heart gets a little bit smaller because there's a little bit less space in your thoracic cavity. As a consequence blood flows more quickly through that smaller volume. The sinoatrial node registers that and sends a signal to your brain, and the brain sends a signal to slow the heart down. So in other words, inhaling speeds your heart rate up exhaling slows your heart rate down. So if you want to speed up your heart rate and be more alert, inhale more or make those inhales more vigorous, more intense. If you wanna calm down, you can do that quickly by making your exhales slightly longer than your inhales or making them more vigorous. This doesn't require any breath work this is something that you can do in real time. And that's what's called respiratory sinus arrhythmia. That's the technical phrase. It's also the basis of what's called heart rate variability or HRV but all you need to remember is, inhaling deeper and longer will speed your heart rate up. Exhaling longer and more intensely will slow your heart rate down and will allow you to calm down in real time.

========================================

--- Video 337 ---
Video ID: vA50EK70whE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vA50EK70whE
Title: How to Increase Motivation & Drive
Published: 2021-03-22 12:00:15 UTC
Description:
This episode explains the science of motivation and drive. I describe how dopamine, a chemical we all make in our brain, underlies our desire for and pursuit of our goals, as well as our capacity to move and experience pleasure. I describe how we can leverage specific behaviors, reward schedules and dopamine-prolactin balance to help ensure we can maintain motivation and capacity for pleasure over the long term. I also discuss dopamine in the context of ADHD, craving and addiction, and some absolutely amazing results about specificity of drug effects based purely on belief.

#HubermanLab #Motivation #Neuroscience

For an updated list of our current sponsors, please visit our website as previous sponsors mentioned in this podcast episode may no longer be affiliated with us: https://hubermanlab.com/sponsors

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

Link to study:
Effects of expectation on specificity of stimulant effects: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33734725/

Timestamps
00:00:00 Introduction 
00:04:22 Announcement: Spanish Subtitles 
00:05:06 Emotions, Addiction & Mindset 
00:06:22 Motivation & Movement: The Dopamine Connection 
00:07:29 A Double-Edged Dopamine Blade 
00:08:56 Dopamine Fundamentals: Precursor to Adrenalin 
00:10:15 The Reward Pathway: An Accelerator & A Brake 
00:12:10 Motivation= Pleasure Plus Pain 
00:14:14 The Dopamine Staircase: Food, Sex, Nicotine, Cocaine, Amphetamine 
00:16:15 Subjective Control of Dopamine Release 
00:17:40 Social Media and Video Games 
00:18:15 Addiction & Dopamine: Progressively Diminishing Returns 
00:18:48 Novelty, Sensation-Seeking & Anticipation 
00:20:15 Craving: Part Pain, Part Pleasure & Pain Always Prevails  
00:23:11 Desire Scales With Pain: The Yearning Function 
00:24:43 The Croissant Craving Circuit 
00:25:45 “Here and Now” Molecules: Serotonin, Bliss & Raphe Nucleus 
00:26:26 In Your Skin Or Out In the World 
00:27:25 Cannabinoids Lethargy & Forgetfulness 
00:28:15 The Almond Meditation
00:29:30 Drugs That Shift Exteroception Versus Interoception 
00:30:36 Emotional Balance, Active & Passive Manipulation 
00:32:36 Procrastination: Leveraging Stress, Breathing, Caffeine, L-Tyrosine, Prescription Drugs 
00:37:04 When Enough Is Never Enough; How Dopamine Undermines Itself
00:38:58 Dopamine-Prolactin Dynamics: Sex, Reproduction & Refractory Periods 
00:40:30 The Coolidge Effect: Novelty-Induced Suppression of Prolactin  
00:42:22 Vitamin B6, Zinc As Mild Prolactin Inhibitors 
00:43:25 Schizophrenia, Dopamine Hyperactivity and Side Effects of Anti-Dopaminergic Drugs 
00:45:08 Prolactin, Post-Satisfaction “Lows” & Extending the Arc of Dopamine 
00:48:00 The Chemistry of “I Won, But Now What?” 
00:49:00 Healthy Emotional Development: Child and Parent 
00:50:03 Never Say “Maybe” (Reward Prediction Error)
00:52:02 Surprise! 
00:52:59 Are You Suppressing Your Drive and Motivation By Working Too Late?
00:54:50 Disambiguating Pleasure and Drive: Dopamine Makes Us Anti-Lazy 
00:58:00 Beta-Phenylethylamine (PEA), & Acetyl L-Carnitine  
01:00:00 Attention Deficit Disorders, Cal Newport Books, Impulsivity & Obesity 
01:03:55 Leveraging Dopamine Schedules 
01:05:22 Subjective Control of Dopamine and Drug Effects: The “Adderall” Experiment 
01:09:03 Caffeine May Protect Dopamine Neurons, Methamphetamine Kills Them 
01:10:57 Nicotine: Dopamine, Possible Neuroprotection, Prolactin Increase 
01:11:53 Gambling, Intermittent Reinforcement, & Persistent Goal Seeking (Bad and Good) 
01:14:14 Intermittent Halting of Celebration; Enjoy Your Wins, But Not All of Them 
01:18:38 A Story Example of Intermittent Reward to Maintain Long-Term Drive and Motivation 
01:21:25 Corrections & Notes About Spanish Captions & Other Languages Soon 
01:24:00 Synthesis & Framework, Zero-Cost Support & A Note About Sponsors 

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English (United States)
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. - I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring you zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools, along those lines I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I've been taking Athletic Greens since 2012 and so I'm delighted that they're a sponsor of the podcast. The reason I started taking Athletic Greens is because I found it rather dizzying to know which vitamins and minerals to take and Athletic Greens covers all my bases for vitamins and minerals. It also includes probiotics and there are now a lot of data supporting the fact that probiotics are important for the gut brain access, for immunity for metabolic health, endocrine health, many, many things. So I take Athletic Greens once, sometimes twice a day I mix it with water and a little bit of lemon juice and to me it tastes delicious. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman and if you do that they'll also give you a year supply of vitamin D3 K2. There are a lot of data now showing that vitamin D3 is important for immune function and a number of other important biological processes. In addition, if you go to athleticgreens.com/huberman you'll get five free travel packs, travel packs make it easy to mix up Athletic Greens when you're in the car, on the plane or generally on the road. So that's Athletic Greens.com to get Athletic Greens. The year supply of vitamin D3 and K2 and the five free travel packs. Our second sponsor of today's podcast is Headspace. Headspace is a meditation app that makes meditation easy. I've been meditating on and off since I was 16 years old. I'm 45 now. So that's about 30 years of on and off meditation and I confess most of that time it was off, meaning I find it really hard to stick to a meditation practice. A few years ago I discovered Headspace while flying on JetBlue flights 'cause at that time they were offering Headspace as something you could watch instead of TV or movies. And it made me feel great. I'd find that I arrived where I was going, more rested, more relaxed and I got the Headspace app and I started using it daily and I've continued to use it daily. Headspace has a large number of meditations all supported by science. There's also now just a tremendous amount of science supporting a meditation practice for all sorts of things like improved sleep, reduced impulsivity, improved cognition. There are just a myriad of positive effects of meditation. The hardest thing is doing it and Headspace makes that easy. If you wanna try the Headspace app and all the meditations they have, you can go to headspace.com/special offer, and you'll get one month completely free of all the meditations they have that's headspace.com/special offer to get one month free of Headspace. The third sponsor of today's podcast is magic spoon. Magic spoon is a low carb, grain-free keto friendly cereal. As I've mentioned a few times before on this podcast the way I eat throughout the day has everything to do with when I wanna be alert and when I wanna be sleepy. So in the first part of the day I fast because that enhances alertness. Then I eat keto. So my lunch and my afternoon meals are ketogenic and then in the evening I eat starches and vegetables because those aid the transition to sleep. So for me, magic spoon as a keto cereal is a great snack. It's really tasty. I don't actually mix mine with milk. I just eat it directly. They have a bunch of different flavors. I like the frosted flavor also because it tastes like donuts. And I have a pastry affliction and I love pastries. So magic spoon allows me to remain on keto during the day it's healthy. It tastes great. I really enjoy it. So if you wanna try magic spoon you can go to magicspoon.com/huberman for a variety pack of different flavors. And if you put Huberman at checkout you'll get 5 dollars off the variety pack. That's magicspoon.com/huberman to try a variety pack of different flavors of magic spoon keto grain-free low carb cereal put "Huberman" at checkout you get 5 dollars off. A quick note before we begin today's discussion about the neuroscience of motivation. I'm pleased to announce that we have now captioned episodes one and two in Spanish and soon, all the episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast will be captioned on YouTube in Spanish. We've used some of the revenue from the podcast to hire expert captioners. So it should be accurate. You might catch a mistake here or there a dialect difference from time to time but by our read and by our experts reads, it's all accurate. So we're very pleased that people who speak Spanish and digest information best in Spanish can now digest the information here on the podcast. Thanks to everyone for supporting the podcast which allows us to broaden our reach in these ways and we do hope to expand to other languages in the very near future. This month, we're talking all about the neuroscience of emotions and today we're going to talk about an extremely important topic that central to our daily life and that's motivation. We're going to talk about pleasure and reward. What underlies our sense of pleasure or reward. We're going to talk about addictions. You can't have a discussion about pleasure and reward without having a discussion about addictions and the addictive properties of certain substances as well as how to break free of addiction. As well we're going to talk about the neurochemistry of drive and mindset. So all these themes are woven together in the context of emotions. Each one of them of course could also be its own entire month of the podcast and in fact, we are going to have an entire month devoted to addiction and I have a very special guest that's going to be joining us to talk about the science and clinical practices that we know are important for understanding and treating addiction. But for now, let's just talk about the neuroscience of motivation and reward of pleasure and pain because those are central to what we think of as emotions whether or not we feel good, whether or not we feel we're on track in life whether or not we feel we're falling behind. So motivation is fundamental to our daily life. It's what allows us to get out of bed in the morning. It's what allows us to pursue long-term goals or short-term goals, motivation and the chemistry of motivation is tightly wound in with the neurochemistry of movement. In fact, the same single molecule ,dopamine is responsible for our sense of motivation and for movement, even though nerves controlling muscles. So again, these are nerves in the spinal cord or brain that move our limbs, the effector chemical they're the one that actually causes the muscles to twitch to contract, is a CDOT Colleen in the brain. Acetylcholine is responsible for focus. However, whether or not we move, whether or not we want to move whether or not we have the desire to overcome barriers of they could be social barriers or financial barriers or time constraints. That depends on this molecule. We call dopamine, it's a fascinating molecule and it lies at the center of so many great things in life and it lies at the center of so many terrible aspects of life namely addiction and certain forms of mental disease. So if ever there was a double-edged blade in the world of neuroscience it's dopamine. So let's talk about what dopamine is and as always we are going to talk about actionable tools today. We're definitely gonna talk about some things related to supplementation. Although you might be surprised to learn that it's not all just about increasing dopamine and in particular, in some cases that's the wrong thing to do. Sometimes it's appropriate sometimes it's not. More so we're going to talk about tools related to what's called dopamine scheduling, how the way that you're leading your life and the way that you're conceptualizing your goals can actually predict whether or not you're going to continue to pursue those goals. And therefore whether or not you will succeed in achieving those goals As well as whether or not you will quit. There's a fundamental relationship between dopamine released in your brain and your desire to exert effort. And you can actually control the schedule of dopamine release but it requires the appropriate knowledge. This is one of those cases where understanding the way the dopamine system works will allow you to leverage it to your benefit. And if you don't understand the way that dopamine works there's a good chance that it's going to pull you out into the current of life. Meaning the rest of the world is going to control your dopamine schedules. So I'm excited to tell you about today's information. You're gonna learn some basic science. You're gonna learn a lot of tools and these tools I believe are applicable whether or not you're five years old eight years old, 80 years older, anything in between. So let's talk about dopamine. Let's get a few basic facts on the table. Dopamine was discovered in the late 1950s and it was discovered as the precursor, meaning the thing from which epinephrin or adrenaline is made. Now that's fundamentally important because this molecule we call dopamine nowadays, we think of as the molecule of reward and pleasure, but actually it is the substrate from which adrenaline is made and in the brain it's the substrate from which epinephrin is made epinephrin is the same thing as adrenaline except in the brain we call it epinephrin. Epinephrin as you may recall from previous podcasts, or if you haven't no problem epinephrin allows us to get into action. It stimulates changes in the blood vessels, in the heart in the organs and tissues of the body that bias us for movement. And if you'd like to learn more about epinephrin you can check out our episode on mastering stress. We talk a lot about it there. Dopamine was initially thought to be just the building block for epinephrin. And it is indeed the chemical building block from which epinephrin is made. However, dopamine does a lot of things on its own. It's not always converted to epinephrin. Dopamine is released from several sites in the brain and body, but perhaps the most important one for today's discussion about motivation and reward is something that sometimes just called the reward pathway for the it's sometimes called the mesolimbic reward pathway but it's fundamentally important to your desire to engage in action and it's fundamentally important for people getting addicted to substances or behaviors. So how does this work? Well, you've got a structure in the deep part of your brain called the VTA. It stands for ventral tegmental area. As always you don't have to remember these names, but if you want to I offer them to you for food further googling, research, reading, et cetera, the VTA or ventral tegmental area contains neurons that send what we call axons little wires that spit out dopamine at a different structure called the nucleus accumbens and those two structures VTA and nucleus accumbens form really the core machinery of the reward pathway and the pathway that controls your motivation for anything you can think of them like an accelerator they bias you for action. However, within the reward pathway, there's also a break the break or restriction on that dopamine which controls when it's released and how much it's released is the prefrontal cortex. The prefrontal cortex is the neural real estate right behind your forehead. It's discussed for so many aspects of neuroscience. You hear about it for decision-making , executive function ,for planning, et cetera. And indeed it's responsible for a lot of those. It's this really unique real estate that we were all endowed with as humans, other animals don't have much of it. We have a lot of it and that prefrontal cortex acts as a brake on the dopamine system without that break you would be purely a pleasure seeking animal. You would be purely pleasure seeking. You would have no basis for regulating your behavior in terms of trying to get things that make you feel good. And that brings us to the important feature of motivation which is that motivation is a two-part process which is about balancing pleasure and pain. Okay. Most people think about motivation and reward and dopamine is just trying to achieve pleasure. And indeed dopamine is released in the brain from the VTA at the* nucleus accumbens. When we experience things that we like. So here's the way to conceptualize this and if you can internalize this in your mind it will really help you as you move through your day trying to understand why you might be motivated or not motivated for certain things. So when you're just sitting around, not doing much of anything, maybe you wake up in bed in the morning. You're thinking about getting up or not. This reward pathway is releasing dopamine at a rate of about three or four times per second. It's kind of firing in a low level. When I say firing me an electrical activity in the neurons. So when you're just around, you feel okay, not depressed not highly motivated, not excited maybe three or four times a second. If suddenly you get excited about something you anticipate something, not receive an award but you get excited in an anticipatory way. Then the rate of firing the rate of activity in this reward pathway suddenly increases to like 30 or 40 times and it has the effect of creating a sense of action or desire to move in the direction of the thing that you're craving. In fact, it's fair to say that dopamine is responsible for wanting and for craving, and that's distinctly different from the way that you hear it talked about normally which is that it's involved in pleasure. So yes, dopamine is released in response to sex. It's released in response to food. It's released in response to a lot of things but it's mostly released in anticipation and craving for a particular thing. It has the effect of narrowing our focus for the thing that we crave and that thing could be as simple as a cup of coffee. It could be as important as a big board meeting. It could be a big, final exam. It could be a, the person that we're excited to meet or see dopamine doesn't care about what you're craving. It just releases at a particular rate. In fact, if we just take a step back and we look at the scientific data on how much the dopamine firing increases in response to different things, you get a pretty interesting window into how your brain works and why you might be motivated or not motivated. Let's say you're hungry, or you're looking forward to a cup of coffee, or you're going to see your partner. Well, your dopamine neurons are firing at a low rate until you start thinking about the thing that you want or the thing that you're looking forward to let's say you're craving chocolate or a good meal, a steak if you like steak or a nice plate of pasta if you like pasta, when you eat that food the amount of dopamine that's released in this reward pathway goes up about 50% above baseline. The neurons there go from firing, three or four times per second to, six or 10 times per second. It really depends and these aren't exact numbers. But if we were to measure the amount of dopamine that's released, it goes up about 50 points, all right. Sex, which is fundamental to our species, continuation and reproduction. Although it doesn't have to be for conceiving children. Sex does release dopamine and it increases dopamine levels about a hundred percent. So basically doubles them. Nicotine of the sort that's in cigarettes or some people are taking nicotine in supplemental form increases the amount of dopamine about 150% above baseline. It also does some other things that we're gonna talk about, but nicotine does that and it's kind of interesting that nicotine would increase the amount of dopamine in your brain very quick, within seconds that's 150 times over baseline as opposed to sex which is a 100 percent above or food which is 50%. Cocaine and amphetamine increase the amount of dopamine that's released a thousand fold within about 10 seconds of consuming the drug. However, just thinking about food, about sex, about nicotine if you like nicotine or cocaine or amphetamine can increase the amount of dopamine that's released to the same degree as actually consuming the drug. Now it depends in some cases, for instance the cocaine user, the addict that wants cocaine can't just think about cocaine and increase the amount of that's released about a thousand fold is actually much lower but it's just enough to put them on the motivation track for it to crave that particular thing. Now, there are reasons why you would have brain circuitry like this. I mean, brain circuitry like this didn't evolve to get you addicted brain circuitry like this evolved in order to motivate behaviors toward particular goals, water when you're thirsty , sex in order to reproduce and we're gonna talk about the relationship between estrogen and testosterone and the dopamine system because those hormones actually bias dopamine to be released. These things and these brain areas in neurons were part of the evolutionary history that led to the continuation of our species. Things like cocaine and amphetamine are disastrous for most people because they really so much dopamine and they create these closed loops where people then only crave the particular thing, cocaine, amphetamine that leads to those massive amounts of dopamine release. Most things don't release that level of dopamine. Now, nowadays there's a ton of interest in social media and in video games and there have been some measurements of the amount of dopamine released video games especially video games have a very high update speed where there's novel territory all the time not novelty is a big stimulus of dopamine. Those can release dopamine somewhere between nicotine and cocaine. So very high levels of dopamine release. Social media is an interesting one because the amount of dopamine that's released in response to logging onto social media initially could be quite high but it seems like likely that there's a taper in the amount of dopamine and yet people still get addicted. So why, why is it that we can get addicted to things that fail to get to elicit the same massive amount of pleasure that they initially did. Being addicted to something isn't just about the fact that it feels so good that you wanna do it over and over again and that's because of this pleasure pain balance that underlies motivation. So let's look a little bit closer at the pleasure pain balance because there in lies the tools for you to be able to control motivation toward healthy things and avoid motivated behaviors towards things that are destructive for you. There are a lot of reasons why people try novel behaviors whether or not those are drugs or whether or not those are adventure, thrill-seeking things or they seek out new partners they take a new class as you'll notice. I'm not placing any judgment or value on these different behaviors. Although I think it's fair to point out that for most people addictive drugs like cocaine and amphetamine are very destructive. Actually we know that about 15 to 20% of people have a genetic bias towards addiction , you sometimes hear that the first time that you use a drug you can become addicted to it. That's actually not been shown to be true for most things in most people, but for some people that actually is true. And we'll talk a little bit later about why certain people are heavily biased toward becoming addicts on the first use of a particular drug. It's actually very interesting, it has everything to do with whether or not they were formerly addicted to something else but in any case, the way that addiction works and the way that motivation works generally in the non-addictive setting is that when you anticipate something a little bit of dopamine is released, and then when you reach that thing, you're engaged in that thing the amount of dopamine goes up even further but as you repeatedly pursue a behavior and you repeatedly engage with a particular thing let's say you love running or you love chocolate as you eat a piece of chocolate believe it or not, it tastes good and then there's a shift away from activation of dopamine. And there are other chemicals that are released that trigger a low level sense of pain. Now you might not feel it as physical pain but the craving that you feel is both one part dopamine and one part, the mirror image of dopamine which is the pain or the craving for yet another piece of chocolate. And this is a very important and subtle feature of the dopamine system. That's not often discussed. People always talk about just as pleasure. You love social media. So it gives you dopamine. And so you engage in that. You like chocolate, it releases dopamine. So you do that. But for every bit of dopamine that's released there's another circuit in the brain that creates you can think of it as kind of like a downward deflection in pleasure. So you engage in something you really want and there's an increase in pleasure. And then without you doing anything there's a mirror image of that which is a downward deflection in pleasure which we're calling pain. So for every bit of pleasure there is a mirror image experience of pain and they overlap in time very closely. So it's sometimes hard to sense this but try it the next time you eat something really delicious. You'll take a bite, it tastes delicious and part of the experience is to want more of that thing. This is true for any pleasureful experience. Now, the diabolical part about dopamine is that because it didn't evolve in order to get you to indulge in more and more and more of something, what happens is that initially you experience an increase in pleasure and you also experience this increase in pain shortly after or woven in with the pleasure that makes you want more of that thing. But with each subsequent time that you encounter that thing that you pursue, the chocolate that you pursue the lover each time, the experience of dopamine release and pleasure is diminished a little bit. And the diabolical thing is that the pain response is increased a little bit and this is best observed in the context of drug seeking behavior. The first time someone decides to take cocaine or amphetamine, they may do it out of boredom. They may do it out of peer pressure. They may do it to relieve some internal sense. Maybe they're bored, or they're just excited. Maybe they're high in novel novelty seeking. There are a lot of reasons why people might try a drug far too many for us to get into our parks here. Maybe they don't even wanna do it but someone encourages them. They will experience a huge dopamine release and they will feel likely very good. However, the next time they take it it won't feel quite as good. And it won't feel even as good the third time or the next time, but the amount of pain the amount of craving that they experience for the drug will increase over time. So much of our pursuit of pleasure is simply to reduce the pain of craving. So the next time you experienced something, you really like I don't wanna take you out of that experience but it's really important that you notice this that if there's something you really enjoy part of that enjoyment is about the anticipation and wanting of more of that thing and that's the pain system in action. And so we can distinguish between dopamine which is really about pleasure and dopamine which is really about motivation to pursue more in order to relieve or exclude future pain. Let me repeat that. Dopamine isn't as much about pleasure, as much as it is about motivation and desire to pursue more in order to reduce the amount of pain and we are now talking about pain as a psychological pain and a craving although people that miss a lover very badly or that really crave a food very badly, or that are addicted to a drug and can't access, it will experience that as a physical craving and a mental craving the body and brain are linked in this way. It's almost, they'll describe it as painful. They yearn for it. And I think the word yearning is one that's very valuable in this context, because yearning seems to include a whole body experience more than just wanting which could just be up in the mind. So your desire for something is proportional to how pleasureful it is to indulge in that thing but also how much pain you experience when you don't have it. And you can now start to let your mind wander into all sorts of examples of addictions or things that you happen to like, I'll use the example that I sometimes use on here which is my love of croissants. Although several of you pointed out these are called croissant but then it sounds like I'm trying to speak French and I always tried to do that when I was a kid and I went to a bilingual school and it failed then it's gonna fail now. So I'm gonna call them croissants. They're delicious. I love them a really good one makes me wanna eat six. It's true. I have pretty good impulse control, I think but it makes me wanna eat six. I taste it and it tastes so delicious and unless I really force myself to experience the taste of it in my mouth and how flaky I'm getting hungry for it right now and delicious the croissant is mostly the tastes of that croissant makes me want to eat more croissants. Now, eventually blood sugar goes up satiety is reached, et cetera. What happens then? What is satisfaction and satiety about? Well, that's a separate neuromodulator. That's about the neuromodulator serotonin. It's about oxytocin. It's about a hormone system that involves something called prolactin. So we're gonna talk about all of those in the book "the Molecule of More" wonderful book those were described as the here and now molecules the ones that allow you to experience your sensations and pleasure in the present and for which the brain stops projecting into the future. So now let's talk about craving and these so-called here and now molecules and how those engage in a kind of push pull balance that will allow you to not just feel more motivated, but also to enjoy the things in life that you are pursuing to a much greater degree. We have neurons in an area of our brain called the raphe R-A-P-H-E The raphe releases serotonin at different places in the brain. Serotonin is the molecule of bliss and contentment for what you already have. I've talked before about exteroception, exteroception is a focus on the outside world, everything beyond the confines of your skin. I've also talked about interoception of focus on things that are happening internally within the confines of your skin. Dopamine and serotonin can be thought of as related to extra reception. Dopamine makes us focused on things outside us that are beyond what we call our personal space where we actually have to move and take action in order to achieve things and serotonin in general has to do with the things that are in our immediate here and now, hence the description of these as the here and now molecules. So it's interesting to point out that the body and the brain can direct its attention towards things outside us or inside us or split our attention between those. I talked about this in a previous podcast but if you didn't see it, no problem. Just understand that dopamine biases us toward thinking about what we don't have, whereas serotonin and some of the related molecules like the endocannabinoids if you picked up on the word cannabinoid, yes it's like cannabis because cannabis attaches to endocannabinoids receptors and the endocannabinoids are receptors that and chemicals that the cannabinoids that you naturally make that are involved in things like forgetting. It's not a coincidence that pot smokers don't have the most terrific memory. You may know a few that have great memories but chances are, they would have even better memories if they weren't pot smokers but you make these molecules that bind to these receptors that make you feel kinda blissed out and content in the present. Those are receptors that exist in us not for sake of consuming THC or marijuana, but for sake of binding of our natural endogenous cannabinoids. So you've got these two systems they're kind of like a push pull and if you were to say in the book or wherever you go there you are Jon Kabat-Zinn talks about this meditation practice. That's different than most meditation practices where you eat one almond and you focus all of your attention on the almond the taste of the almond, the texture of the almond. That's really a mindfulness practice that's geared towards trying to take a behavior which is normally about pursuit, normally feeding as we were going to engage in feeding because of dopamine we pursue more of a food because of that pleasure pain relationship I talked about before the focus on the one almond or becoming very present in any behavior that normally would be a kind of extra susceptive pursuit behavior and bring it into the here and now that's a mental trick or a mental task that the mindfulness community has really embraced in order to try and create increased pleasure for what you already have. It's really trying to accomplish a shift from dopamine being released to serotonin in the cannabinoid system, being involved in that behavior. So if you're interested in mindfulness which is something I've talked about before in this podcast and I sort of made some off the cuff jokes about the opposite of mindfulness being mindlessness. Mindfulness is a vast space that is a mindful practice that a lot of people have engaged in. And indeed it can give you deeper appreciation for things that you already have. Dopamine has the quality of making people kind of rabidly in pursuit of things. Look at people who are high on cocaine or amphetamine, and they are almost entirely extra receptive drugs like marijuana, the opioids anything that really hits the serotonin system hard tend to make people rather lethargic and content to stay exactly where they are. They don't wanna pursue much at all. Occasionally when people smoke marijuana or consume THC their appetite goes way up and they really wanna consume food. That's because of its effects on insulin and its effects on blood sugar, which is a slightly separate matter. But since some of you, probably your minds might've gone to those either experiences or reports of what pot does, that's why it does that. So you've got these molecules like dopamine that make you focused on the things you want and the things you crave. And then you've got the molecules that make you content with what you have. So the most important thing, perhaps in creating a healthy emotional landscape is to have a balance between these two neuromodulator systems people that are always in anticipation and desire and seeking that's wonderful for pursuing goals. However, it's terrible for enjoying life and actually those people are actually quite difficult to be around. There's a certain, almost sociopathic element to people who are what they call hyper dopaminergic. People who are always on the dopaminergic scale to the point where they are always pursuing goals. In fact, those people are known to be at least in the psychological spectrum. They can be very manipulative dopamine and the pursuit of something doesn't necessarily have to be high energy and intense from the outside. When you observe it from the outside. In fact, there are people who will manipulate in order to get what they want. This has been shown who have high levels of dopamine release in their brain, but they've learned that a kind of passive manipulation is the best way to maneuver through a particular environment. I don't wanna focus too much on sociopathy because those are kind of extreme examples but it just goes to show that people who identify a goal and realize the series of steps that they need to take in order to achieve that goal can either do it through ethical means or non ethical means they can do it through active pursuit, being the kind of type a person that's always declaring their goals and going after it, posting it on Instagram telling everybody about it, try and recruit others. There's that phenotype there's that kind of signature of dopamine and then there are the people that wanna get what they want, and they're doing it by always serving other people by always taking care of everybody else's needs by always trying to accomplish their goals but through a mode that at least from the outside seems more passive or more about supporting others. Neither of these are good or bad. And that's because dopamine is a molecule. It doesn't care how you reach your goals. It only cares that you reach your goals because the internal sensation is one again of mild pleasure a little bit of pain, although more pain over time. If you're not reaching those goals and it takes you away from the here and now. So at about this point in the podcast I'm guessing that some you are thinking, okay, great. I want more dopamine. I want to be more motivated. I don't wanna procrastinate as much and I want to be able to experience life. I want these here and now molecules to be released as well. Well, there is a way to do that, but you have to understand the source of procrastination is not one thing. There are basically two kinds of procrastinators or so says the research. The first kind are people that actually really enjoy the stress of the impending deadline. It's the only way they can get into action. These are people that really like the feeling of something being due in an hour and how activated and sharp and focused that makes them feel. Those people are people that are tapping into the epinephrin system, the stress system and for which the stress really tightens their ability to see it creates that soda straw view of the world. It creates an action element in the body that makes them feel like they wanna move. It really eliminates all the distractions for them. So they're actually leveraging stress internal stress in order to achieve a state that they can't seem to otherwise achieve. I won't tell you what to do in order to overcome all kinds of procrastination but from a logical perspective, it makes sense therefore, for those kinds of people to think about other ways that they can get their system into activation, I've talked about this in previous podcasts but a couple of those tools might be the what we called super oxygenation breathing which I admit is not always super oxygenating. So this would be if didn't want it to consume anything. This could be 25 or 30 cycles of in deep inhales and exhales. It's likely to create some anxiety and a low level stress. If you're someone who's prone to panic attacks I wouldn't recommend this, but it's pretty straight forward. It will deploy adrenaline into your system. And you will find that your visual field is focused and you will be able to work and focus better than if you just kinda waited around for some wave of motivation to wash over you. Normally you're waiting for that deadline to come into sight and then that's what the stimulus is. But you can self-direct adrenaline release without ingesting anything. You can also ingest coffee, caffeine or Mate or something like that, which is what I prefer very often to coffee, which has caffeine. Caffeine does release dopamine at low levels how much it releases dopamine it isn't clear. It seems to increase firing in these neurons in the nucleus accumbens by about 30% which is a pretty low level, but it can create agitation so for caffeine sensitive people, that could be a problem. I've talked before about things like L tyrosine the precursor to dopamine or Mucuna Purina. I talked about that in the last episode but if you didn't see that, just to remind you L tyrosine is present in red meats, it's in certain nuts and L tyrosine is the precursor to dopamine. You can supplement L tyrosine. If you like, you will get a big inflection in dopamine but there is a crash associated with it. However, it will increase motivation in the short term not suggesting anyone do this. I wanna be very clear to say what I always say. I'm not a doctor. I don't prescribe anything. I'm a professor. I profess things. You have to know whether or not these things are appropriate for your mental and physical health or not. So you need to consult a doctor. For instance, people who suffer from schizotypal or schizophrenia or mania should probably not be taking supplements that increase their dopamine levels. Now, if you can't increase your level of focus and your level of alertness and your level of motivation using breathing well then there might be something else at play. There are other procrastinators for which they simply are not releasing enough dopamine. They're not making enough dopamine. And for those people there are a variety of things that can increase dopamine. I do suggest you talk to a psychiatrist or doctor I've talked about Mucuna Purina, which is 99.9%. L-DOPA the precursor to dopamine. So there are people that do much better when they take things that increase their dopamine levels. There are antidepressants like Wellbutrin Pru prior own which increase is the other name for it which increased dopamine and epinephrin, it can increase risk of epileptic attacks if you're epileptic. So again, you have to talk to your doctor but they will increase dopamine and motivation and focus. However, if you think back to our earlier discussion about dopamine, dopamine if it's very high, creates a sense of pleasure and the desire for more, so you can also become a person for which enough is never enough. The only thing that dopamine really wants is more of the thing that releases dopamine and so big inflections in dopamine, whether or not they come from cocaine or whether or not they come from a supplementation, caffeine exercise study regime will just make you want more of something and we've all heard before of growth mindset this incredible discovery of my colleague, Carol Dweck where some of these positive mindsets that the psychology community has put forth as really good for pursuit of goals and pursuit of things that require long bouts of effort. Well, it's wonderful if you can learn to attach dopamine to that process psychologically, but if you're starting to augment the amount of dopamine increase the amount of dopamine through things like supplementation and prescription drugs what's gonna happen is you're not only gonna need to pursue more and more of the sorts of things that are associated with the dopamine. So more doing more studying, more sport more pursuit, higher mountains, more money, more whatever but we know that over time, the mirror image of that the pain of lack of accomplishment will also increase. This is the pleasure pain relationship that we talked about earlier. So in a few moments, I'm gonna talk about how to think about healthy dopamine schedules but I just wanna take a step back for a second and talk a little bit about the flip side of Dolby and what happens after this so-called dopamine crash what mechanisms are installed in us, because believe it or not, there are mechanisms that are installed in all of us that really put the complete and total break on dopamine, why they're there and what they do because you've experienced these before and there are actually ways that you can navigate them. These dopamine crashes are these intentional dopamine suppression mechanisms in order to leverage healthier dopamine schedules and to feel more motivated. Perhaps one of the most fundamental mechanisms in all humans is the neuro circuitry designed for seeking out mates and for reproduction and that's because the continuation of any one species is the primary driver for any species. That's just the reality. Now I'm removing all context here. So whatever I say, of course, it's on a backdrop of consensual age appropriate species, appropriate context, appropriate all of that. This is not about the sociology of reproduction and sex. This is about the biology, the biology of sex in males and females doesn't matter if it's XX chromosome X Y chromosome X, X, Y X, Y Y doesn't matter. The reality is that dopamine is released on anticipation and consummation of sex and reproduction. And after orgasm, regardless of chromosomal background there's a dramatic decrease in dopamine and an increase in a hormone called prolactin. Now, prolactin is associated with milk let-down in lactating mothers. It's also present in males and in general prolactin creates a sense of lethargy of stillness and lack of desire to move and lack of desire to pursue more of whatever released the dopamine. Prolactin in fact, sets the refractory period on a male's ability to mate again now this is gonna vary tremendously from individual to individual. It also can, there are data showing that it can vary tremendously from mate pairing to mate pairing the number one thing that releases dopamine is novelty and it is true that the refractory period is shortened by the introduction of novel mates. This was first shown in a kind of classic experiment in of all things in chickens. This is called the Coolidge effect and the story is the story goes and I believe it's a true story, it's actually in all the neuroendocrinology textbooks. So I believe it's true is that president Calvin Coolidge was visiting a chicken farm. They were is being taken around and the person who was hosting the visit showed them a rooster that was Coolidge and his wife were on the visit and said "this rooster copulates thousands of times per day." And Mrs. Coolidge apparently kind of elbowed president Coolidge and said, "ah, you hear that" kind of like pointing out the prowess of this rooster and Coolidge said," yeah but let me ask you a question, same hen or different hens." It turns out it was different hens. And the reason is the introduction of a novel mate increases dopamine levels. And what's interesting about this is that after copulation prolactin goes through the roof and prevents further copulation dopamine crashes but the introduction of some sort of novelty shortens this. Now this is not a ploy for people to change mates often what this is a story about the dopamine and prolactin system that also exists in humans. Now, there are actually things that people in certain communities take in order to bypass these refractory periods. There's actually drugs that increase dopamine suppress prolactin and vice versa. There's actually another way to suppress prolactin. Vitamin B6 is a fairly potent prolactin inhibitor as a zinc. And if you look out there in the literature and for those either in the wellness and cost sports performance community a lot of the so-called quote unquote testosterone boosters are actually combinations of vitamin B6 and zinc which inhibit prolactin and by way of inhibiting prolactin increase dopamine. So they do have some functional effect in that regard. They're not really increasing testosterone directly they're suppressing prolactin levels. And there are clinical conditions like hyperprolactinemia which leads to massive decreases in libido, et cetera. And there are prescription drugs to treat hyperprolactinemia, which of course you should always talk to an endocrinologist about those sorts of prescription drugs. So it's interesting that this very basic mechanism of dopamine and prolactin, this sort of motivation, no more motivation is a system that evolved for reproduction first, but that actually takes place. And you can see in elsewhere in the world, for instance schizophrenia disease that has many different types and facets, but schizophrenia is a case of an often of hyperactivation of the dopamine system so much so that it can make people feel kind of high, they hallucinate, I mean, we're talking very very high or dysregulated dopamine circuits in the brain. One of the treatments for schizophrenia are drugs that block dopamine receptors. And if you have the it's unfortunate, there are so many people that are out on the street these days who have schizophrenia, some of whom are taking their meds, some of who, whom aren't if you ever see somebody on the street that's doing what's it's like a lip smacking and writhing it's actually called tardive dyskinesia. This is a movement disorder that's created by taking these anti dopaminergic drugs. So you can imagine these anti-doping synergic drugs while being very effective in suppressing hallucinations they create these movement problems because of dopamines importance for the movement circuitry so-called pyramidal circuitry for the aficionados. In addition, you sometimes see in males that take these drugs, drugs like haloperidol and the other dopamine blockers that they actually develop breast tissue gynecomastia. So the development of male breast tissue is because of the elevated levels of prolactin because they're suppressing their dopamine so much. Now that's a really extreme case, but maybe perhaps if you see somebody engaging these very strange kind of face riding and body riding behaviors that's actually not a consequence of their mental illness. That's a consequence most often of the drugs that they're taking to treat the mental illness. Those are side effects of those drugs. Now prolactin is increased any time. We have some really heightened, intense experience. It's not just released after sex and reproduction. Prolactin is released after some major event, it's actually responsible thought for some of postpartum depression for different types of kind of the, the let down the low. I can distinctly remember that after finals or after publishing a big paper, I would be very, very happy but then I'd find that, Oh, you know like what next or things might seem a little bit dimmed or dulled out for the next day or so, or the following week. The timescales on these are gonna vary because some people release a lot of dopamine for a very long time in response to something great and other people have a quick inflection of dopamine and then they're back to feeling not so great. It really varies from person to person. In fact, long ago, I started as I learned about dopamine reward circuitry and the relationship would be between dopamine and prolactin. I started to leverage this, believe it or not. After some major event I would take a couple 100 milligrams of vitamin B6. I think for people who have diabetic neuropathy you need to be careful with vitamin B6 check with your doctor. I was told, although I haven't found the literature on this that it can, in some cases exacerbate peripheral neuropathy, but for most people it's thought to be reasonably safe but again, always check with your physician but I would take some B6 to kind of offset some of that low. And I actually, I don't know if it was subjective or not but it seemed to have somewhat of a positive effect. I also started just internalizing the fact that dopamine is so subjective. There are objective aspects to dopamine and how much is released but there's also some subjective effects to dopamine. And so one of the things that you can do in order to generally just be a happier person especially if you're a person in pursuit of long-term goals of any kind is the longer that you can extend that positive phase of the dopamine release. And the more that you can blunt the pain response to that the better, and you can actually do this cognitively. I used to joke with my lab that when we'd publish a paper I would get really excited, but I wouldn't allow myself to get too excited what I wanted to do instead and what I've still tried to do is try and extend the arc of that positive experience as long as I possibly can simply by thinking back like, Oh, that was really cool. I really enjoy doing that work. I really enjoyed the discovery. I really enjoy doing that with the people that I was working with at the time, what a pleasure that was. I can get this very easily from pictures of people, in things like Costello that I really enjoy trips that I've taken. So you can extend pleasure without having to engage in the behavior over and over. That's extending the arc of that dopamine release as well. It offset some of the pain of not having that experience occur over and over and over again. Now for the high performers out there you're probably familiar with this many people who have a big achievement. Their first thoughts are will now, what what am I gonna do next? How am I ever gonna exceed that? And indeed many people who are very high on this kind of dopamine sensation and novelty seeking scale are prone to addiction. They're prone to the rabid pursuit of external goals of external perception to the neglect of these internal mechanisms that allow them to feel calm and happy. So for people that are very driven, very motivated adopting a practice of being able to engage in the here and now the sort of almond type practices we talked about earlier of learning how to achieve a really good night's sleep on a regular basis through tools and mechanisms I talked about in previous podcasts gives us sort of balance to the pleasure seeking for an offsetting of pain and the pleasure in the here and now. So pleasure is really two things. It's a joy in pursuit but it's also the joy in what you have. And there's a beautiful model of emotional development that was developed by Alan shore professor at UCLA and psychiatrist that talks about some of the basics of good infant parent attachment where good parenting that leads to healthy adult relationships and emotion regulation tends to include both sides of this dopamine serotonin spectrum. We talk about the relationship between child and parent typically was the mother, but also father where you can get the child really excited by kind of squealing and ramping them up or talking about something or ice cream or play. And the kid gets very excited. That's the dopaminergic system the anticipation of something that's coming, but as well engaging with children in a way that's really about everything that you have right in the here and now, the reading of the book the kids always seem to ask one more time. One more. They seem to want more of the things that they enjoy but really engaging with them in a way that increases their sense of pleasure for what's right there, as well as giving them a lot of things to be excited about and positive anticipation. Now, having worked years ago with at-risk kids and also with young kids at summer camps and things like that one of the things that you learn is you never say maybe to a kid about a reward. If you say, we might have ice cream later you are essentially saying we are having ice cream. They don't hear the maybe part and it turns out adults don't either. It's really interesting. There's something called reward prediction error. I've talked about this before but I haven't really talked about it deeply in the context of the dopamine system, dopamine, as I've said, is involved in anticipation of wanting, not of having it's involved in motivation toward the thing that you want. And it biases us towards action. Reward prediction, error equals the actual amount of dopamine that's released in response to something versus minus the amount that's expected. Okay. So if you tell a kid, we might have ice cream they hear we're gonna have ice cream and they expect it. And if you later say, well we're not gonna have ice cream and I said, maybe that's actually gonna lead to a much bigger crash in dopamine. It's going to lead to a negative signal, a punishment signal. It's literally going to feel like pain. So kids, you can leverage this. If your parents say maybe they're effectively telling your dopamine system absolutely. Now adults are like this too. If we think something might happen and it doesn't happen there's a big crash in our aspect, in our emotionality and that's because that dopamine system goes from firing about three to four times per second to about 10 or 15 times per second in the possibility that something might happen possibility is deeply woven into our biology of the dopamine and motivation system, as a way for us presumably in ancient times to explore novel territories and get a sense that maybe there's water there. Maybe there are mates there. Maybe there's better food there maybe there's resources there. The maybe is important thing that in language terms maybe means maybe, but in neuro-biological terms maybe means perhaps there's going to be the surprise of an even bigger dopamine reward. And the one thing dopamine loves more than anything else is surprise. When we get something positive, we go to the mailbox we're expecting some bills and you open it up and you get a letter from somebody you haven't thought about in a long time. And you adore that person. That's a huge dopamine release. It actually triggers neuroplasticity. You probably never forget that because of the way that dopamine Gates' plasticity. When we get an, a surprise of something that we didn't want, also it creates plasticity. So the surprise, novelty, motivation, and reward they're all woven into this package that we call dopamine. And the cool thing is you can actually regulate this whole system in a way that will steer you or lean you towards more positive anticipation of things in life and less disappointment. It's simply a matter of adjusting what we call the dopamine schedule. Okay. A couple things before we continue, we're gonna talk about attention deficit in a few minutes. But before that, I wanna talk about something that I've mentioned before in previous podcasts, but that you may not be aware of and if you're aware of you may still be doing, which is severely injuring your ability to release dopamine it's creating a sense of disappointment in ways that are most likely hurting you mentally and physically. And that's the blunting of dopamine by viewing light in the middle of the night I realized this is not a discussion about sleep and circadian rhythms, but the data now are so strong showing that viewing bright light from about 10:00 PM to 4:00 AM too often triggers activation of this circuit called the habenula So this is eye to It goes from your retina to a structure called the habenula H-A-B-E-N-U-L-A Then from the habenula to some of this reward circuitry and it suppresses the activation of the reward. Circuitry, not just in that moment, but to things that you normally positively anticipate and pursue. And the reason I'm bring this up now is because I haven't really gone into depth on the dopamine system before now, you understand that you have this very precious reward system. That's kind of a double-edged sword. It needs to be taken care of and treated well. You wanna use it, but not overuse it, et cetera but getting bright light exposure in the middle of the night is reducing your capacity to release dopamine. So it's not just about the sleep that you're not getting in that time. It's also that you're not getting the dopamine that would otherwise be available to you. So you're actually taking, think of light in the middle of the night as a kind of antagonist is kind of a blocker of dopamine. Maybe that'll help you. If you're somebody who has to work in the middle of the night and you wanna bypass this dopamine suppression please see the episode about jet lag and shift work because there are a lot of tips there that will allow you to do that in order to understand how to control the dopamine system how to leverage it for a better life. You need to understand the results of a very important experiment. This experiment was able to separate pleasure from motivation. It's a very simple, but like many simple experiments a very elegant experiment, what they did and this has now been done in animals. and in humans, they offered rats food. It was a food that they particularly liked and the animals would lever press for a pellet of food kind of classic experiment that eat the food and they presumably liked the food because they were motivated, press the lever and eat it. Great. They took other rats. They eliminated the dopamine neurons. You can do this by injection of a neurotoxin that destroys these neurons. So they actually had no dopamine in their brain. They have no ability to release dopamine and they gave them a lever that rats would sit there and they'd hit the lever and they'd eat the food. They're still enjoyed the food. So you say, well, okay so dopamine is involved in motivation. It is involved in pleasure. No, it absolutely is. They could still enjoy the food, but if they moved the rat literally one body length away from the lever. What they found was the animals that had dopamine would move over to the lever, press it and eat. And the ones, the rats that did not have dopamine available to them, wouldn't even move one body lane, one rat length to the lever in order to press it and get the food. Dopamine, therefore is not about the ability to experience pleasure, it is about motivation for pleasure. This has been repeated in humans in a variety of different scenarios. You can't really do the lever press thing quite as easily but we know that people have low levels of dopamine are simply less motivated even though they can achieve pleasure. And this has serious ramifications for the fact that now, quote unquote pleasure or ways to induce things that we believe give us pleasure are everywhere. And they're within reach. We don't have to forage for our food. There's lot of highly processed, high sugar high fat foods. There's also foods that are healthy, that tastes good but they're hopefully they're pretty easy to get all that different people have different access to things, of course, but dopamine isn't about the ability to experience pleasure. It's about how motivated you are to reach those pleasures. And so many of you are probably thinking, wow I'm not a very motivated person. Like you talked about the one kind of procrastination earlier. What about when I just feel kind of met about life now for some of you, there may be a real clinical depression and you should talk to a professional. There are very good prescription drugs that can really help people. There's also great non drug treatments of psychotherapy and other treatments that are being developed in addition to psychotherapy in the various kinds of psychoanalysis, et cetera, that one can use. I think the data really points to the fact that a combination of pharmacology and talk therapies are generally best. And there are a huge range of these things. I know many of you are in these professions. We're not gonna talk about that right now. There's a compound. That's kind of interesting in the supplement space that isn't MaCuna appearing, L-DOPA it's not L tyrosine that isn't promoting massive releases of dopamine or even dopamine alone but a combination of dopamine and serotonin. And it's an intriguing molecule it's sold over the counter. Again, you have to check with your healthcare provider before you would take anything or remove anything. That's very important, which is, but it's, fenal ethyl fenal Ethel aiming, or P-E-A pea or beta fenal Ethel aiming releases dopamine at low levels but also serotonin and low level. So it's kind of a cocktail of the motivation molecules as well as the quote unquote here and now molecules. And people's response to this varies widely but many people report feeling heightened sense of mental acuity wellbeing, et cetera. It is a bit of a stimulant like anything that triggers activation of the dopamine and norepinephrine pathway but is an interesting supplement. I actually haven't tried it before. So I can't report on my own experiences. I will point you however, to examine.com. It wouldn't be a Huberman Lab Podcast episode. If I didn't point you to examine.com this incredible free resource where you can put in any supplement. And it will tell you the quote unquote human effect matrix it'll point you to the various studies. We always provide a link to this in the caption. It's an amazing resource. So you can go there to explore more but I haven't talked about beta Fino, L Ethel, Amy and before in previous podcasts and I wanted to add it to the list of things that tap into the dopamine system that are in this. I guess we call it now the supplementation space. I personally am fascinated by these supplements and the things that exist out there that are non-prescription that seem to, at least in some people have positive effects. For instance, last episode we talked about CDOT L-carnitine, which there are several papers that report antidepressant effects as well as positive effects on other things, sperm health, ovarian health, et cetera. I learned from a colleague that acetyl L-carnitine in Europe is actually a prescription drug in the US it's sold over the counter. So I guess, depending on where you're listening to this the availability might vary. And as always, I put the caveat, you have to check with your healthcare provider, if it's right for you but I'm fascinated by the fact that these things exist and that they lie somewhere between prescription drugs and doing nothing. And that makes them interesting compounds. And I think that P-E-A beta fennel ethylamine is yet another one of the, of such compounds. I going to talk a lot about attention deficit and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in a future episode, but I do wanna mention it today in the context of dopamine and impulsivity. So ADHD or ADD so attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, ADD our clinical diagnoses. I think a lot of people nowadays walk around and say I have ADD or you have ADD and indeed one can create a sort of ADD by attention switching all the time. I'm a big fan of Cal Newport. He wrote the book" deep work." I believe he was the one who said context switching is terrible for the brain. It's like the worst thing for the brain because then the brain learns to context, switch and real deep work productivity, learning of all kinds good relationships of all kinds really come from depth of experience not from breadth of experience within the moment. And so I think it's important to know that there's clinical ADHD and ADD and then there's the kind that people are kind of inducing and through distraction and social media and phones, et cetera. And those can sometimes lead to clinical ADHD and ADD But I wanna talk about ADHD and ADD in kids just briefly the drugs that are normally given to treat those conditions ADHD and ADD are things like Adderall things that have very amphetamine, light qualities and structures, and you might ask, why would they do that? Well, it turns out that in kids these activate that for brain circuitry the break that exists on the deeper mesolimbic circuitry. So as you recall, there's the VTA and nucleus accumbens as the kind of accelerators on dopamine. And then there's the prefrontal cortex which acts as a break and can limit impulsivity. And those drugs tend to increase the activity of neurons in that pathway, the prefrontal cortex and it reduces impulsivity. In fact, there's a experiment described in the book "the molecule of more," which is really interesting where they looked at impulsivity in obese children and it turns out they did this experiment in a safe way that they looked at kids both obese kids and non obese kids and their willingness to cross a very busy highway. And it turns out that the obese kids got hit by cars more often than non obese children. It turns out this was a virtual reality experiment and it had nothing to do with the fact that they were obese or limitations on movement or speed of movement. It was that the obese children were more impulsive in a variety of contexts not just in this virtual crossing the street thing. And it turns out the data point to the fact that impulsivity at age 10 is actually predictive of overeating disorders at a later stage in life. So some of these drugs that are designed to create heightened activity in the braking system the decelerator of the reward pathway are designed to reduce impulsivity because they suppress the release of dopamine and they allow, hopefully they allow children and it and when they become adults to better control the schedule of dopamine release. So now let's talk about what is a dopamine schedule and how you can leverage this in order to have heightened levels of motivation but not get so much dopamine that you're experiencing or a crash afterwards. And also, so that you can experience heightened pleasure from the various pursuits that you are engaged in life. I know many of you are interested in tools that will allow you to be more motivated to focus longer, sleep better. That's really what the Huberman Lab Podcast is all about but always framed in the context of neuro-biological principles and objective mechanisms. There are some tools that we can apply to the dopamine system and motivation that can really improve our ability to stay in pursuit of things, as well as enjoy things after we've achieved our goals, or even an route, our goals. And here's the key principle. Dopamine is very subjective. Meaning you can either allow yourself to experience the pleasure of reaching a milestone of achieving or some craving or not. Now that won't work in the extreme cases of drugs like cocaine and amphetamine, but it's actually pretty powerful what one can do with the subjective system. In fact, I'm gonna describe to you an experiment that highlights just how powerful the subjective readout or the subjective interpretation of a given experience really can be. Even at the level of pharmacology. I love examples of subjective effects over things that would otherwise seem hardwired because they really illustrate the interplay between our cognition, our belief system and what would otherwise be these, just plug and chug kind of mechanisms of, you eat X amount of chocolate or you drink X amount of water after being water deprived for a certain amount of time. And you get X amount of dopamine. Here's the experiment. The experiment was just published on March 18, 2021. So very recently, and the title of the experiment is expectation for stimulant type modifies caffeine is effects on mood and cognition and this was done in college students. And it's a fascinating study. What they did is they gave college students either placebo essentially nothing or 200 milligrams of caffeine. 200 milligrams of caffeine is about what's in a well, a typical coffee like a medium coffee that you buy a drip coffee or a coffee that you'd make at home. It's a fair amount of caffeine. If you were to take in pill form it would definitely make you feel more alert unless you were one of those mutants literally mutants that is insensitive to caffeine. And those mutants are pretty rare. So they took 65 undergraduate students in college. They randomized them to either placebo or caffeine and they told them that they were either getting caffeine or Adderall. Now, Adderall cognitively carries a very different expectation. College students know Adderall to be a much stronger stimulant than caffeine. They know it to create a sort of high. This is the way the students described it and they thought that it would increase their level of focus and their ability to perform work. So it was really interesting is there was definitely an effect of placebo versus caffeine. That's not surprising, however, right, you take a placebo you may or may not feel more alert but you take 200 milligrams of caffeine very likely you're gonna feel very alert but there was also an effect of whether or not the students thought they were getting caffeine or Adderall. The subjects receiving caffeine reported feeling more stimulated, anxious, and motivated than the subjects that received the placebo. Okay. But the ones that expected Adderall reported stronger amphetamine effects. So they felt much more high. They performed better on a working memory test. And in general, they had all the increased cognitive effects that would have been seen with Adderall but they were only ingesting caffeine. And so this shows an interaction between the drug caffeine and the expectation that it was Adderall. So it led to heightened performance simply because the students thought they were getting Adderall. And I don't know whether or not they told them at the end that it wasn't Adderall. I doubt that they did this. If you wanna look it up the study was published in the journal of experimental clinical psychopharmacology. The paper is Looby L-O-O-B-Y at all. And again, it was just published March 18th, 2021 speaks to the fact that yes, there are so-called placebo effects but this is different than placebo. This is a belief effect about what the specific reactions to a given stimulant ought to be. And I think this is very important because I think that it points to the fact that the top down the kind of higher level cognitive processes are impacting even the most basic fundamental aspects of the say dopamine release or our mountain adrenaline release or epinephrin release in ways that can positively impact performance. In this case, it was a positive improvement in working memory and focus. As long as we were talking about caffeine I'd like to point out a study. That's really interesting. This was published in journal of neuroscience which is the society for neurosciences kind of flagship journal. It's their journal. It's a good journal and what they showed was that caffeine can increase dopamine release in the brain by about 30%. That wasn't surprising. I even said that earlier, but what they also showed is that it has a protective effect on dopamine neurons. So caffeine in some cases may not just increase dopamine release but it might actually have a protective effect on dopamine neurons. Now that's distinctly different from some claims that drugs like MDMA ecstasy have been it's been argued can, are neurotoxic for things like dopamine and serotonin neurons. The study that was published about that in the journal science, which is an extremely prestigious excellent journal later, it was shown that it wasn't MDMA ecstasy that was given in that case. It was actually amphetamine, which is known to destroy dopaminergic and serotonergic neurons. So what does this mean? This means that low levels of caffeine may at least in a few studies be protective for dopamine neurons over time that MDMA ecstasy something that's in clinical trials right now for the treatment of trauma PTSD of various kinds and depression but still illegal at this point in time may although it doesn't appear yet from any published studies destroy dopaminergic neurons, perhaps origin, urgent neuron. So there's a real asterix and a question mark there but amphetamine and in particular methamphetamine is very destructive for dopaminergic neurons. So I don't think any of us needed any additional reasons to avoid methamphetamine. This drug that creates huge increases in dopamine and then huge crashes from that dopamine, very destructive drug. But in addition to that seems to destroy dopaminergic neurons from time to time, I've talked about nicotine on here, not smoking because obviously smoking is bad lung cancer's bad for health, et cetera, but nicotine in supplemental form I've mentioned that a very famous neuroscientists Nobel prize winning scientists choose a lot of Nicorette. I know other people that you Nicorette they believe in its neuroprotective effects for Parkinson's and Alzheimer's and indeed nicotine can stimulate dopamine release. We talked about that earlier whether or not it has a protective effect isn't clear the protective effects might be through the noradrenergic and acetylcholine systems. Those findings are still unclear but it is interesting to note that nicotine can increase prolactin. Somewhat. There are a couple of studies I'd be happy to link to them in the caption that shows that nicotine taken too much over too long periods of time can also increase prolactin which again is the opposite side of dopamine. So today we've talked a lot about the dopamine system and those kinds of schedules that will allow craving or addiction, but what's the schedule of dopamine. That's going to allow you to maximize on your pursuit of pleasure and your elimination of pain. And we get the answer to that from our good friend gambling, the reason gambling works the reason why people will throw their lives away. The reason why people go back again and again and again to places like Las Vegas and Atlantic city is because of the hope and anticipation it's as those are cities in places built on dopamine, they are leveraging your dopamine system. And I realized that there are experienced gamblers. There are people that enjoy gambling. I'll actually just say, I like sitting at the roulette table. I was take a designated amount of money. It's not much, I enjoy playing a little bit of roulette. I certainly enjoy when I win. I certainly don't like it when I lose but I do it cheerly for the pleasure of playing. And I do it very seldom. I don't have a gambling problem. And if I did, I'd probably tell you but I don't have a gambling problem. Yet people throw away the entire lives on gambling. And as a friend of mine who's a certified addiction treatment specialist tells me that gambling addiction is a particularly sinister because the next time really could be the thing that changes everything. Unlike other addictions the next time really could change everything. And that's embedded in the mind of the gambling addict and rarely does it work out in favor of the wellbeing of the gambling addict and their family. However, the intermittent reinforcement schedule was discovered long ago by scientific researchers. So this is the slot machine that every once in a while gives you a wind to keep you playing. This is the, the probability of winning on the craps table or the roulette table, or at blackjack just often enough that you're willing to buy tickets, head out there play again, go downstairs again from your room even though you swore you were done for the night intermittent reinforcement is the most powerful form of dopamine reward schedule to keep you doing something so we can export that. We can use it for good. If there's something that you're pursuing in life whether or not it's an academic goal or a financial goal, a relationship goal. One of the things that you can do to ensure that you will remain on the path to that goal for a very long time, and that you will continue to exceed your previous performance as well as continue to enjoy the dopamine release that occurs when you hit the milestones that you want to achieve is to occasionally remove reward subjectively, let's say you set out a goal of making I'm gonna make this quantitative with respect to finances 'cause it just is an easy description but this could also be in sport. This could be in school. This could be in music could be in anything creative endeavors but let's say you set out a certain financial goal or let's say you wanna get a certain number of followers on whatever social media platform as you reach each one of those goals. You should know now that the amount of dopamine is not going to peak. It's actually going to diminish and make you crave more the key to avoiding that crash but to still keep it in healthy levels that will allow you to continue. Your pursuit is as you are, stair casing toward your goal. Maybe that's dollars, maybe that's followers maybe that's grades maybe that's some other metric it's metals or trophies. You actually want to blunt the reward response for some of those intermediate goals. Now I'm not telling you should celebrate your wins but I'm telling you not to celebrate all of them. Whereas a good friend of mine who recently fortunately for him had a great financial success. He asked me and somebody else a good friend of mine. Who's very tuned into dopamine reward schedules understands how they work at a really deep level. And he said," I don't know what to do next." And we said," Oh, well, that's simple, You should just give most of it away." And this wasn't a ploy to receive any of the money ourselves. This was really about reducing the impact of that reward. Now hopefully giving them money away. If you already have enough of it would be something that was rewarding in and of itself. But if you're a student who's pursuing goals in university or you're an athlete, who's pursuing goals it actually makes sense from a rational perspective. Once you understand these mechanisms to hit a new high point of performance, or to get that A-plus or a for you if it's an A-minus, et cetera and to tell yourself, okay, that was good. But to actually actively blunt the reward to not go and celebrate too intensely, because in doing that you keep your dopamine system in check and you ensure that you're gonna stay on the path of continued pursuit not just for that thing, but for all things big increases in dopamine leads to big crashes in dopamine and big increases in dopamine up the ante. They increase the extent to which you are willing to invest time and energy in order to achieve goals and rewards that may be out of your reach. You never really know if you're going to succeed. So to make this crystal clear, celebrate your wins but don't celebrate every win. That's one way that you can ensure that you're going to continue down the path of progress. And I think most of the learning tools that are in schools are about reward for genuine performance. They are about encouraging us. We do have to believe that we can perform well. One of the hallmarks of growth mindset is the internalization that we're not getting it right yet. The word yet is very important. And also the sense that we reward our good behavior, our good performance, but not every time. One way to do this is to actually take the reward and reinforcement out of your own hands and your own mind. And you tell somebody that they are in control of whether or not you're allowed to feel good about your wins. Now, I realize it's very unnatural for most people but if you're somebody who simply going to be in pursuit and you're going to really register your wins, and you think that that's gonna actually make you a better performer it will in the short term, but not in the longterm. So you can lift the what Las Vegas and Atlantic city and other gambling mechanisms and places have known for a long time. They lifted it from the scientists. You can now take it back and you can start to leverage that. And you just make it intermittent. You reward yourself, not on a predictable schedule so not every other time or every third time or every 10th time, but sometimes it's three in a row then not at all for 10 days. So reward is important. Self reward is critically important but make sure that you're not doing it on such a predictable schedule that you burn out these dopamine circuits or that you undercut your own ability to strive and achieve. Actually have a story from graduate school which I was forced into an intermittent reinforcement schedule that I do believe has served me very well in my scientific career and other aspects of life. My graduate advisor was an amazing scientist. Unfortunately, she passed away but amazing scientists and amazing human being with a very dry and somewhat cruel sense of humor. Her name was Barbara Chapman, and we published a paper in the journal, science and science nature and cell are considered the big three the most competitive journals to publish in. And I had a first author paper in science. It was really exciting to me. I was a graduate student. I was very excited about the discovery. I was excited that it was in science. I was just thrilled. And I remember when the paper finally got accepted because it had involved a ton of revisions and a lot of very hard work. And she came in and she said," paper got accepted." I was super excited and she just kind of sat there and nodded, and I said "are we gonna celebrate, are we gonna have a party?" Or what, like, what are we gonna do it? And I'll never forget her answer. She said," I think we should skip this one." And I thought she was joking. And I said," what do you mean skip this one?" We're gonna publish the paper. He said, yeah, we're gonna publish the paper. But she said, " maybe when you get like four more maybe three, maybe two too." And I thought she was messing with me and she wasn't messing with me. And she was right. We never had a party. We had a celebration for that paper. I think she was really trying to instill two ideas in me. One is that the work itself was what was supposed to be most rewarding. That practice of experimentation a writing the paper, the experience of achieving something they worked very hard at and that did indeed feel amazing. I actually can still feel it in my body. Now, the excitement. So there's a, still a dopamine release or that arc is going very long. This would be almost 20 years ago now that this happened. So that's remarkable. The other one is that she's right. We never went out and celebrated and we did celebrate other wins other papers in the future and things of that sort. But she was either consciously or subconsciously putting me on an intermittent reward schedule. And to this day when something really good happens I actually hesitate as to whether or not I wanna internalize that and celebrate whether I wanna tell anybody which is its own form of celebration because then you're getting positive feedback. And so I'm very cautious with how I deploy dopamine release in response to wins. It's certainly not the only way that I've navigated my career. There are a number of other principles I incorporate but intermittent reward for wins for achievements is a very powerful way to ensure that you will stay on the path of pursuit. At this point in the podcast I'd like to take a moment to address some corrections. I made some errors in previous episodes. They weren't major errors but a couple of you pointed them out and it's important to me that we strive for accuracy. So the first one was I talked in a previous episode about the potential benefits for some people, not all of ashwagandha and its role in blunting cortisol and a way of offsetting medium term, and some long-term stress. It's a supplement that I've benefited from. It works through the GABA system and some other systems, someone pointed out a study that admittedly was done in rats. I point I was focusing mainly on studies in humans during the episode, but they point out a study that was done in rats that showed that long-term administration of ashwagandha could actually create some negative effects mainly on the fibroid and perhaps even the cortisol system maybe the melatonin system. I just wanna acknowledge that study. I'll reference it in the caption again that was a rat study. I was focused on human studies. Please go to examine.com. Put in ashwagandha will tell you the various effects on different aspects of brain and body. It will also link to the pub med articles that are relevant there it is called the human effect matrix 'cause that's only focused on humans. That's one of the reasons I like examined.com as it's focused on human studies, again a wonderful free resource, but I do appreciate that you pointed out that study because I do want people to be aware of the range of effects that these various compounds can have as well. A couple of times in previous episodes I said five HTP and not five HT five HT is serotonin five HTP is a precursor to a serotonin. I was talking about supplements and compounds that can stimulate the release of serotonin. In the previous episode, I was actually referring to it in a context for which I don't personally like to take five HTP. That's just my own bias for reasons I described in that episode. But if you heard me say five HTP when I meant to say five HT, I apologize. And then last, I just wanna point out again something that I mentioned at the beginning which is that the Huberman Lab Podcast is now subtitled in Spanish episodes one and two as well as our welcome video are in Spanish. The other ones will be subtitled soon. You can expect that within the next couple of weeks. So if you know Spanish speaking people who prefer to digest the information in Spanish or that's, you can look forward to the Spanish subtitles. You need to activate those in the caption feature on YouTube. Unfortunately, we don't have Spanish dubbing over on the audio platforms. I realized once again, we've covered a lot of material. Hopefully you now know far more about the dopamine system reward and motivation than you did at the beginning of this podcast. Hopefully you also understand the other side of dopamine and reward, which is pain and the balance of this pleasure pain system, as well as the molecules that we call or that were described in the molecule of more book, I should say as the here and now molecules things like serotonin and the endocannabinoids. We talked about a variety of supplement based tools, things like vitamin B6 and zinc as they relate to prolactin P-E-A Very interesting compound again I've never tried it very interesting definitely in use out there L-DOPA MuCuna appearings talked about caffeine, talked about nicotine. Talk about how some of the effects of Adderall can be created purely cognitively without actually ingesting Adderall, simply by telling people they're ingesting Adderall giving them caffeine. Very interesting study that I referenced a little bit earlier, and we talked about scheduling dopamine adopting the intermittent reward schedule for yourself in order to ensure long-term engagement with pursuits that I hope are healthy pursuits and ones that serve you well this was by no means an exhaustive coverage of all things, dopamine and motivation. It was by no means. The only time that we're gonna talk about dopamine and motivation, next episode we're gonna continue to talk about emotions from yet another perspective but hopefully you have enough now to think about in the meantime, and that you can consider adopting in your own life and practices as always. I really wanna thank you for your time and attention. If you learned something useful today, please pass it along. One of the things that we teach in science that I think is really wonderful to adopt in general in life is this idea of watch one, do one, teach one. This is what we tell graduate students and med students and post-docs watch somebody do something, learn it then do it, apply it, see if it works for you and then teach it. So it's usually not watch one, do one, teach one. It's usually watch one do 20 teach as many people as you possibly want. I'm not looking for attribution. These are tools that are grounded in neuroscience for which I can't claim attribution. I'm just passing them along so that you can adopt them if you like and pass them along. If you think people can benefit from them, many of you have continued to ask how you can help support the Huberman Lab Podcast. If you like what we're doing here. And you like the information that we're sharing please click subscribe on the YouTube channel. That really helps us as well. If you wanna hit the notifications button, that will allow you to make sure you don't miss any episodes. Typically we release episodes every Monday but in the future we may release episodes as well as short clips. More often than that as well If you want to subscribe on Apple or Spotify or both that's a great help to us. And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us up to a five star review. We do use the comment section here on YouTube to inform future content and to address any questions and clear up any miss communications or misconceptions that might arise. So please put your questions, your comments and your suggestions for future content. In the comment section below. The other way to support us is to check out our sponsors that were mentioned at the beginning of the podcast. The links to those sponsors are in the captions. As well we've set up a Patreon account which is patreon.com/andrewhuberman. That allows you to support the podcast at any level that you like as well. Because we mentioned supplements from time to time throughout the podcast and people always ask about what brands and sources we use or suggest for those supplements. We partnered with Thorne T-H-O-R-N-E Thorne supplements are known to be among the most stringent supplements in terms of the specificity of what's in the bottle matches what's on the label. The quality of the ingredients is exceedingly high the Mayo Clinic and all the major sports organizations are partnered with Thorne because of that stringency and that commitment to rigor. If you'd like to see the supplements that I personally take as well as get 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne makes you can go to thorne.com/u, that's the letter U, slash Huberman (thorne.com/u/huberman). And you can see what I take and any of those supplements as well as any of the other products on the Thorne site will be available to you at 20% off that's thorne.com/u/huberman to get 20% off any of the supplements that Thorne makes. Finally, I wanna thank you for your time and attention today. I hope you learned a lot and that you learned a lot of possible tools that you could incorporate into your life as it relates to motivation and emotion. Thank you for your interest in science. (soft music)

========================================

--- Video 338 ---
Video ID: XfURDjegrAw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XfURDjegrAw
Title: How Foods and Nutrients Control Our Moods
Published: 2021-03-15 12:00:08 UTC
Description:
This episode explains the brain-body connections that allow the specific foods we eat to control our moods and motivation. I discuss the vagus nerve and its role in dopamine and serotonin release in the brain. I review Omega-3 fatty acids and the key role of the gut microbiome in supporting (or hindering) our mental and emotional states. Many actionable tools are reviewed and discussed related to fasting, ketogenic and plant-based diets, probiotics, fermented foods, fish oils, artificial sweeteners, specific supplements that promote dopamine and serotonin, and some remarkable behavioral (and belief) effects.

#HubermanLab #Emotions #Neuroscience

For an updated list of our current sponsors, please visit our website as previous sponsors mentioned in this podcast episode may no longer be affiliated with us: https://hubermanlab.com/sponsors

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

Artificial Sweeteners and Gut Microbiome:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25231862/
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25231865/

Anti-Depressive Effects of EPAs
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18247193/

Free Resource: Links to Studies on Supplements Discussed
https://examine.com

Timestamps
00:00:00 Introduction 
00:05:00 Emotions: Aligning Mind & Body
00:06:41 Nutrients, Neurochemicals and Mood 
00:08:39 Primitive Expressions and Actions 
00:12:30 The Vagus Nerve: Truth, Fiction, Function 
00:15:45 “Vagus Stimulation”: A Terrible Concept 
00:16:35 Polyvagal Theory
00:18:27 Vagus Senses Many Things, & Moves Our Organs 
00:19:35 Sugar Sensing Without Perception of Sweetness 
00:23:00 Eating-Induced Anxiety 
00:27:30 We Eat Until Our Brain Perceives “Amino Acid Threshold” 
00:29:45 Reward Prediction Error: Buildup, Letdown and Wanting More 
00:32:01 L-Tyrosine, Dopamine, Motivation, Mood, & Movement 
00:34:04 Supplementing L-Tyrosine, Drugs of Abuse, Wellbutrin 
00:38:29 Serotonin: Gut, Brain, Satiety and Prozac 
00:43:38 Eating to Promote Dopamine (Daytime) & Serotonin (Night Time) 
00:44:30 Supplementing Serotonin: Sleep, & Caution About Sleep Disruptions 
00:46:40 Examine.com An Amazing Cost-Free Resource with Links to Science Papers 
00:48:05 Mucuna Pruriens: The Dopamine Bean with a Serotonin Outer Shell 
00:51:00 Emotional Context and Book Recommendation: “How Emotions Are Made” 
00:54:55 Exercise: Powerful Mood Enhancer, But Lacks Specificity 
00:56:45 Omega-3: Omega-6 Ratios, Fish Oil and Alleviating Depression
01:01:00 Fish Oil as Antidepressant
01:02:40 EPAs May Improve Mood via Heart Rate Variability: Gut-Heart-Brain 
01:07:24 Alternatives to Fish Oil to Obtain Sufficient Omega-3/EPAs 
01:09:05 L-Carnitine for Mood, Sperm and Ovary Quality, Autism, Fibromyalgia, Migraine 
01:16:29 Gut-Microbiome: Myths, Truths & the Tubes Within Us 
01:21:55 Probiotics, Brain Fog, Autism, Fermentation 
01:25:20 Artificial Sweeteners & the Gut Microbiome: NOT All Bad; It Depends! 
01:28:00 Ketogenic, Vegan, & Processed Food Effects, Individual Differences 
01:33:20 Fasting-Based Depletion of Our Microbiome 
01:35:20 How Mindset Effects Our Responses to Foods: Amazing (Ghrelin) Effects! 
01:38:30 How Mindset Controls Our Metabolism 
01:41:03 Closing Comments, Thanks, Support & Resources  

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

[Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac https://www.blabacphoto.com/]

Transcript Language: English (United States)
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat music] My name is Andrew Huberman, and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor today is Theragun. Theragun is a handheld percussive therapy device that releases deep muscle tension. I was first introduced to Theragun in 2017 while on a laboratory expedition. We were in the middle of the Pacific Ocean filming great white sharks for my laboratory studies on fear using virtual reality we were working very hard around the clock and I and other people on the trip were picking up a lot of aches and pains and just kind of chronic soreness. Couple of people had injuries that were flaring up because of all the hard work and lack of sleep. Someone had a Theragun and pretty soon it was getting passed around. It became the most coveted device on board. Everyone was using it to work on these different sites of soreness. And I really fell in love with the thing so much so that when I got back, I immediately purchased one and I've used it almost daily ever since, I use it on muscles that are sore, I use it on areas that I'm really working on to release tension and improve tissue quality and so forth. The great thing about Theragun is it's really quiet so you can use it while you're in a conversation or while you're watching a movie and it doesn't disrupt those activities at all. If you want to try Theragun you can try Theragun by going to theragun.com/huberman to get your gen four Theragun, they start at $199. But if you think about it, a massage, which is an hour long or 90 minutes long is typically in that range of costs. And this is something you can use every day whenever you want, and even while enjoying other activities. So that's theragun.com/huberman. The second sponsor of today's podcast is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. The great thing about InsideTracker is that it gives you data that you can make sense of. I've long been a believer in getting blood samples taken and more recently I've become a believer in getting DNA samples taken in order to understand what's going on at the level of hormones, metabolic factors and other things that profoundly influence our immediate and long-term health. The problem always has been getting those samples taken and making sense of those samples. InsideTracker makes all of that really easy. They'll even come to your home to take the samples. Then you get the information back. And while typically after getting information back there's these long lists of numbers and nobody knows what to do with them, InsideTracker makes it really easy to interpret what those numbers mean. And it points to things in terms of lifestyle, exercise, nutrition, and so forth that can help you adjust some of the numbers that you might need to bring down or up to put into the appropriate normal range. So I find this whole process to be immensely valuable for guiding my health choices and also just for giving me peace of mind about how my body and the rest of my health are doing internally. Something you just can't know without a blood and DNA test. If you want to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman, and you'll get 25% off any of their programs, you want to put Huberman at checkout. So that's insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of InsideTracker's plans and put Huberman at checkout. The third sponsor of today's podcast is Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I started using Athletic Greens in 2012. So I'm delighted that they're a sponsor of the podcast. The reason I started using Athletic Greens and the reason I still take it once or twice per day, is that I find it very hard to know what vitamins and minerals I need to take. And by drinking Athletic Greens, I get it all in one easy to consume great tasting formula. I really do like the way it tastes. I mix mine with water and a little bit of lemon or lime juice. And to me it's delicious. The other thing about Athletic Greens that I really like are the probiotics there are so much data out there now telling us, and I certainly believe based on the data that I've seen that probiotics are really important for support of the gut microbiome, the gut brain axis, the immune system and many other aspects of our biology. So with Athletic Greens, I get the vitamins the minerals and the probiotics that I need. If you want to try Athletic Greens you can go to athletigreens.com/huberman. And if you do that, they'll also give you a year supply of vitamin D3K2. Vitamin D3 we also know is really important for things like immune system and metabolic support. So that's athleticgreens.com/huberman to get Athletic Greens and a year's supply of vitamin D3K2. And they'll give you five free travel packs. Today we're talking all about emotions, and emotions are central to our entire experience of life. Whether or not we're happy or sad or depressed or angry is our life experience. And yet I think with all the importance we've placed on emotions. Very few people actually understand how emotions arise in our brain and body. And I mentioned brain and body because as you'll see today emotions really capture the brain body relationship. We cannot say that emotions arise just from what happens in our head. It also involves events, biological events chemical events within our body. The other thing about emotions is that there's no real agreement as to what's a good emotion or a bad emotion. Today we're gonna talk about the biology of the chemicals and pathways that give rise to emotions. And I'm going to equip you with several, if not many tools that will allow you to regulate and change and steer your emotions should you want, but not using the typical advice. You know, everyone's probably heard of this thing. Oh if you're feeling depressed, just smile, you know, it's impossible to be depressed while smiling. Look, if that were true we wouldn't have any depressed people because depressed people don't want to be depressed. And it is not the case that simply smiling will reverse depression or sadness. And it's simply not the case that smiling can inhibit sadness. It just doesn't work that way. However, it is the case that certain things that are happening in our body influence how our brain functions and the chemicals that are released. And today we're gonna talk a lot about how the brain and body interact to create these things called emotions in the context of food and nutrition. And the reason we're doing that is not because I am beating the drum about particular diet regimens or anything. In fact, I'm not gonna do any of that. What I'm gonna do is I'm gonna review some of the most important scientific data that point to how ingesting certain nutrients, both macro nutrients like proteins, fats, and carbohydrates, as well as micronutrients can impact the chemicals in our brain that give rise to the feelings of being happy or sad or sleepy or alert when you want to be sleepy or sleepy when you want to be alert. So this is sure to be a broad discussion and yet we're gonna get very specific about what emotions are, how they arise in the body, tools that one can use in order to better control their emotions, tools that people can use to believe it or not feel happier or feel calmer. And that's because in the last 20 years or so there's been an explosion of scientific studies exploring how the brain and body interact to support certain neurochemicals that give us these feelings of being alert and happy or depressed or certain that our life is gonna be terrible or certain that our life is going to be great. So as mysterious as all that might sound and confusing as all that might sound we're gonna make it very clear today. And you're gonna come away from this conversation with a lot of tools that you can act on immediately. And those tools are grounded in scientific data. We are gonna provide links to several of the studies, and I'm gonna mention several of those studies as we go along. But overall, the goal today is for you to understand how moods and emotions arise and the different pathways in your brain and body that allow them to happen and how you can use those pathways to change those emotions and the tools that you can rely on in very specific ways to shift from being, say, slightly depressed, to feeling happier. There actually are ways to do that, or from feeling too alert and anxious to feeling calmer. And these are tools that are distinct from the tools I've talked about in previous episodes. The discussion around emotions has a long and rich history going back to Darwin. And even long before Darwin, this is a conversation that philosophers and scientists have been having for hundreds if not thousands of years. The idea that Darwin put forth and that was really attractive for about the last hundred years was that emotions are universal and that some of the facial expressions around emotion are universal and other people have capitalized on that idea. And to some extent it's true. I mean, I think that the two most robust examples of that would be when we see something or we smell something or we taste something that we like, there does tend to be a postural leaning in. We tend to inhale air at that time, we tend to bring in more of whatever chemical substances there is. We tend to these mm's and kind of lean in closer to things that are attractive to us. And when we see and experience things that we don't like sometimes it's a mild aversion. We just kind of lean back or look away. Other times it's an intensive version of disgust and we tend to cringe our face. We tend to avoid inhaling any of the chemicals. This probably has roots in ancient biological mechanisms that are to prevent us from ingesting things that are bad for us, chemical compounds and tastes that might be poisonous. So much of the foundation of any discussion about emotion has to center around this kind of push pull of attraction to things or aversion from things. Now that's a very basic way of thinking about emotions but if you think about it, it works for a lot of different circumstances and in the brain everywhere from the deep circuits of the brain to the more kind of what we call higher order evolved centers of the brain. We have this push pull thing where either a previous episode, I talked about go, the circuits that allow you to emphasize action and then no go circuits, the circuits and the basal ganglia that allow you to de-emphasize action and prevent action. We talked about how that's a push pull. So aversion and attraction is a push pull too. Delight or happiness or excitement are attractions to certain things and ideas, songs, people, places, foods aversion is a leaning out. It's a disgust, it's an avoidance. And so we can break down the discussion about emotions into these simpler versions of themselves, but at the core of that of attraction or aversion is an important theme that you might realize already. But most people tend to overlook which is that there's an action there you're either moving forward or you're moving away from something. And any time you're talking about action in the nervous system, you're talking about motor behaviors. You're talking about literally the contraction of muscles to move you toward or away from things. And any time you're talking about nerve to muscle and action, you're talking about the brain and the body, because the brain can't move itself that the brain has a body so that the organism can move. And the body has a brain so that the organism, you, can move toward or away from things that you deem to be good or bad for you. Now, some of these things that we're attracted to and some of them that we avoid are what we call innate or hardwired. You know, when we taste bitter compounds, I'm not saying about bitter like a little bit of a bitters in your drink or something like that, but really bitter compounds. We tend to avoid those because they're associated with poisons. When we taste things that are sweet or that are savory we tend to pursue more of those. We tend to lean toward those so to speak and we tend to not avoid them. So there are circuits in the brain for aversion and for attraction toward things. And the body is governing a lot of that. And so immediately in this conversation I want to raise an important point which is about a nerve pathway that many, many people have heard of that gets discussed all the time. And that is one of the most kind of oversold for the wrong reasons and undersold, unfortunately, for its real power, which is the vagus nerve. So the vagus nerve is one, not the only, but one way in which our brain and body are connected and regulates our emotional states. Now, many of you have probably heard about polyvagal theory. I'm gonna talk about this today. Polyvagal theory was popularized by Stephen Porges and it's an interesting theory, certain aspects of it, frankly, hold up to the science, some of it doesn't. And I'm gonna discuss all of that today. A lot of the vagus and the excitement about the vagus, V-A-G-U-S, is because it's somehow got into the mind of the public that the vagus is involved in calming us down. So what is the vagus nerve? Okay, we're gonna make this really simple, in particular for those that are just listening, you can just imagine this, for those are watching I'll point to the various areas, but basically vagus is the 10th cranial nerve which basically means that the neurons, the control center of each of those neurons in the vagus lives just kind of near the neck, right? And a branch of the vagus goes into the brain. They send a little wire into the brain. The other branch goes into the periphery but not just the gut. It goes into the stomach, the intestines the heart, the lungs, and the immune system. So this vagus nerve is incredible because it's taking information from the body and it has two directions. The first is what we call sensory. So it's sensing things that are happening in the gut in the lungs, everything, for example, in the lungs when our lungs are distended, the vagus nerve senses that and sends that information up into the brain. It also consents things in the gut like how distended or empty your stomach happens to be, it can sense heart rate. It can sense your immune system, whether or not you have bacteria or things invading you in your body. So it sends that information up to the brain. So it's a two-way street and sensory information is going up to the brain. That's all vagus. So it's like a super highway sensory information going one way and in the other direction is motor control. So the vagus is not just for sensing things. It's actually for controlling things. It's got a sensory pathway and a motor pathway. So that's the first thing I think everyone should know about the vagus. In fact, it's so important that I feel like this is as important as people knowing that walking involves flexors and extensors. And if you don't think that's important, it's as important as walking, frankly, because the vagus is the way in which you can govern the brain body connection. And in which you can steer various aspects of your mood and wellbeing, but most people just don't understand how to use it. So first you got to understand what it is. So you've got sensory information coming from all these different organs of the body up to the brain. You've got motor information going from the brain back to the body. And so you've got this super highway within you. Now what actually regulates the vagus. Oftentimes you'll hear things like, oh this particular behavior rubbing your face at a particular location or breathing in a particular way, or a warm bath or something stimulates the vagus. Well, right now, I want everyone to know that, quote unquote, stimulating the vagus broadly speaking is a terrible way to think about the vagus because do you know what, if you have a contaminant inside your body the vagus senses that and projects that information to your brain, and you start to generate a fever you start to try and kill that contaminant in your body. So I don't know that you want to stimulate the vagus just as a general theme today, we're going to get specific about how you can activate particular circuits, certain pathways from certain organs to the brain in order to feel better or relieve certain conditions. But you certainly don't want to just stimulate the vagus. Now excitement about the vagus in part is because of what quite honestly, was a fairly pioneering theory about the vagus which is his polyvagal theory. So polyvagal, the word poly means many, is cool because it acknowledges that the vagus has a lot of different branches. It's not just one thing. And so I really liked that. I liked the naming polyvagal. The idea that Porges has put forward was that there's a dorsal vagus, which is kind of runs in the back of the spinal cord, which is involved in alertness and activation and kind of fight or flight type stuff. And that there's a ventral pathway and that that's involved in more kind of empathic behaviors. That is not quite in agreement with the modern anatomy, but he was doing the best with what he had at the time. So, okay. The problem I have with the polyvagal theory is the way that it's discussed people often say, oh if your dorsal vagus is too active then you tend to be someone who's a little too keyed up and people who are kind of in a state of freeze or kind of flacid and kind of like just not really active and they're just lethargic. Well, then that pathway is hypoactive. It should be more active. So there are a lot of theories about how psychology maps onto the vagus. That as far as I know, don't map to any real physiology. Now, the other problem with this kind of the way that the polyvagal theory is discussed probably not by the real experts, but by a lot of people is that people start to diagnose different psychological and physical manifestations through the vagus. They would say things like, Oh this person is hyper flexible at the joints and therefore their dorsal vagus isn't active enough or something like that. And it's really kind of gone way outside the lane lines. So today we're gonna clean up a lot of that. Let's make it really simple about how the vagus actually works. At least as we understand it today in 2021. First of all, as I mentioned, you have sensory information the same way that you detect light with your eyes or you hear sounds with your ears, you have sensors in your gut that sense how full or empty your gut is. It can also sense how acidic your gut is. It can sense various things within your gut. Your heart is doing the same. It's informing the brain how fast your heart is beating, how full your lungs are has been communicated and then the status of your immune system. So the way to think about the vagus is the same way I would think about the eyes. The eyes are looking at colors, they're looking at motion they're looking how bright it is. And each one of those things, those features is telling the brain something different. So the brain can decide when to be awake or asleep whether or not it's looking at somebody's attractive or unattractive. The vagus nerve is also analyzing many features within the body and informing the brain of how to feel about that and what to do. So a really good example that I think is an exciting one is as it relates to sugar. So we all know that sweet things generally tastes good. I'm not particularly a fan of very sweet things. You know, I'd much rather have cheese or pizza or hamburger or steak. I like savory fatty foods, but I do like sweet foods. And most people find sweet foods to be attractive. They want them, they might or they might not be able to regulate their behavior around them, but they want them. And what's really interesting is that for hundreds of years people have thought that that's because of the way that sweet foods taste. So that makes sense, right? You eat something that tastes sweet. You want more of it. Well, it turns out that it's much more interesting than that. When you eat something sweet within your stomach, you have cells, neurons, that sense the presence of sugary foods independent of their taste and signal to the brain. So those sensors, those neurons send information up the vagus to your brain goes through a series of stations. And then you release dopamine. This molecule that makes you want more of whatever it is that you just ingested. In fact, this pathway is so powerful that they've done experiments where they completely numb all the taste and feeling in somebody's mouth they're blindfolded. So they don't know what they're eating and they're eating a food. That's either sugary or not sugary. And what they find is that even though people can't taste the sugary food they crave more of the food that contains sugar because of the sensors in the gut, that sense sugar. So to put this differently, you actually have sensors within your body that make you crave sugar independent of the sweet taste of those things. Now that's incredible. And what it does, and what it tells us is that we have circuits in our body that are driving us towards certain behaviors and making us feel good even though we can't perceive them. Now, for those of you that are really interested in gut intuition and kind of gut feelings this is a gut feeling except this is a chemical gut feeling. This is a particular set of neurons detecting that something in your body has a particular feature, in this case the presence of sugars, and sending information to the brain essentially to control your behavior. And I find this remarkable, because what it means is that what we call attractive isn't always coming from our thoughts about that or our feelings, or even our perception. We are drawn to particular foods and we're drawn to perhaps also to particular people, places and other things because of information that's coming from our body. And we're gonna talk about what one can do with this information. I know many people are thoughtful or concerned about sugars these days thinking we all ingest too much sugar. There's sugar snuck into all the things we eat. And indeed, that's true. I mean, this should completely reframe the way that we think about the sort of so-called hidden sugars in foods. What this means is that even if a food is very savory like a piece of pizza or a piece of bread or even like a salad dressing if there's sugar snuck into that and you can't taste it you will still crave more of that thing without knowing that you crave it because it has sugar. In other words, you might find yourself wanting certain foods and not knowing why you want those foods. So I find this to be a fascinating aspect of our biology and yes, it relates to mood and emotion. And we'll talk about how that is in a moment. So let's just back up a bit and ask the question why do we eat certain things? And why do certain foods make us feel good? And other foods actually make us feel anxious. I think some people may be familiar with this. Other people might not, but most people don't realize that as you approach eating there's an anxiety associated with that. It's an alertness. Remember in the previous discussions, or even if you don't and you haven't seen those, all of your moods and feelings of wellbeing are anchored on this continuum of alertness versus calmness. And we hear so often about rest and digest. You know that, oh, after we eat, we feel really nice and full, hopefully comfortably full and not too full. And we're relaxing. And we feel satiated, it's associated with serotonin this molecule of satiation. That's all true. But what most people don't know is that there's an area of the hypothalamus. So deepen the brain kind of in the middle deep portion of the brain called the lateral hypothalamus. And the lateral hypothalamus is really interesting because it controls feeding, but it inhibits feeding. It stops us from feeding. And there's another area in the brain. If you want names, I'll give them to you. If you don't want names, just ignore them, delete them from your memory and awareness, called the locus coeruleus, now the locus coeruleus sits back further in the brainstem and it releases norepinephrine which is essentially adrenaline. It makes us feel alert. Now, locus coeruleus has a lot of different functions in the brain, but when we are going to eat let's say we walk into a restaurant, we sit down or we're preparing a meal, locus coeruleus is known to release noradrenaline in the brain. It's creating a kind of alertness. This has ancient utility, but it's creating this alertness. And for many people, they experience that as they approach food as stress as anxiety. But what's interesting is that as we approach food locus coeruleus is releasing all these molecules that make us feel more anxious and alert sometimes it's felt as excitement. And that asks probably to do with how we feel about food generally, are we happy with our relationship with food? Are we trying to restrict our relationship to food, are people coming over for dinner, all that will play in of course, but there's a certain stress and anxiety upon approach to food. And as we approach food and we feel that anxiety locus coeruleus activates the lateral hypothalamus in a way that inhibits feeding that makes us not want to eat. So a lot of people who have kind of pre-meal anxiety or anxiety around food and they can't seem to just calm down and have a good meal to access that later rest and digest. A lot of that is because of this heightened stress upon approach to food and a lot of the tools that are out there, both for eating disorders and for just kind of the general public who isn't suffering from eating disorders, things like mindfulness around meals. You know, they always tell you you should never eat when stressed. I'm sorry, but my life is not organized in a way that I can do that. I would never eat. Right because I eat when I'm awake and I don't know if I'm stressed, but I don't think I am but I tend to run around a lot during the day. I don't generally take time to do two or three deep breaths before I eat. I generally will just eat. That can be healthy or unhealthy depending on the quality of your digestion. I think using digestion as a guide is good, but a lot of people aren't aware that this interaction between locus coeruleus and lateral hypothalamus is a basic mechanism where we are supposed to get a little bit alert and anxious around mealtime. And then as we eat, the mechanisms for calming and satiation are supposed to kick in and those mechanisms involve as I mentioned earlier, two things. One is how things taste, digestion starts in the mouth. Of course, we taste our food. Everyone tells us we should chew our food more. Yes, that can improve digestion. We're not supposed to drink too many fluids as we eat. That's true too, but a lot of how we feel while we eat and after we eat is because of this vagus sensing of what's in our gut. It's sending information all the time. Is there sugar? Are there fats? Are there contaminants? There are a lot of information. These so-called parallel pathways that are going up into our brain that regulate whether or not we want to eat more of something or not. And there are accelerators, things that make us want to eat more, like sugar and fats because those are nutrient dense. And they helps generally, at least in the short term support the survival of animals, but also amino acids. And this is very important. There are a lot of data, but much of what comes from the data on what people eat and how much they eat is from a subconscious detection of how many amino acids and what the array, meaning the constellation of amino acids is in a given food. And it's fair to say that the sum total of these studies pointing in a direction where people will basically eat, not until their stomach is full but until the brain perceives that they have adequate intake of amino acids. Now, this is a conversation that comes up in the context of you know, the meat, only the keto, the kind of zone diet, the Mediterranean diet, the vegan diet. I'm largely going to ignore the kind of strict camps today. I will talk a little bit about it, because I think each one of them actually taps into something important about this brain body relationship that the other ones don't. But I don't want to get into a discussion about the ethics of different foods of animal based or non animal based. 'Cause that's not the topic today. It's really about nutrient sensing and amino acid sensing. So we generally will eat until our gut tells our brain that we have adequate amounts of these amino acids. Amino acids of course are important because they are the building blocks of sure, muscle, and the other things in our body that need repair. But what most people don't realize is that amino acids are what the neurochemicals in the brain are made from. Now, this is vitally important. Okay, so we've heard dopamine is this molecule that makes you feel good. Actually dopamine is a molecule that makes you feel good. It's released within the brain. And it does feel very good when you have dopamine release, dopamine releases caused by surprise, excitement, events that you're looking forward to and they turnout well, it is inhibited by events you're looking forward to that don't work out when someone says they're going to call that you're really really excited to talk to, and then they don't, or you thought a movie was gonna be really great and it's not, or you expect a meal to be really delicious. And it's kind of, eh, and we actually there's a name for that. It's called reward prediction error. And you can actually use this in the context of meals and plans in a way that's very useful with yourself and people you know, essentially if you expect something to be really terrific it really does place a higher expectation at the chemical level. So if you don't get as much dopamine as you're expecting from something, so you you hear about a really great restaurant or a place that has a really, in my case, I have, I wouldn't call it an addiction. I would call it more of an affliction for croissants. The best vegetable of course, is the croissant. And I get really excited about the fact that someone will tell me, oh there's this place and they have incredible croissants. You gotta go there. So I get really excited, and I'll go. And just them telling me that it's gonna be really terrific raises an expectation, a dopamine expectation. And unless those croissants are amazing chances are I'm going to experience them as less good, less satisfying. I will truly release less dopamine than I would had they just said, oh yeah, I think that there are croissants down the street. Or if I just tried one at random, and that's because of this reward prediction error your expectation of something releases dopamine and the actual event releases dopamine. And if the event related dopamine does not exceed the expectation or at least match it, there's a much higher tendency that you won't pursue that thing again. So dopamine is really powerful and it's not just the molecule of reward. It is the molecule of desire. It's the molecule of wanting not just the molecule of having. And a book, since people often ask for book recommendations. I don't know the author personally, but I love the book. It's called "The Molecule Of More". It's a terrific book. I wish I had written it, frankly, but if you want to learn more about dopamine reward prediction error and how dopamine regulates various aspects of your emotional and motivational life, it's a terrific read. Dopamine is what's going to lead us to want to eat more of something or to not want more of something, because dopamine really is about craving. It's about motivation and it's about desire. And as I mentioned, these amino acid sensors in our gut are detecting how many amino acids but they're also detecting which amino acids. And there's a particular amino acid called L-tyrosine which comes from food. You can look up online, which foods contain L-tyrosine. It is in meats. It is in nuts. It is also in some plant-based foods. L-tyrosine is the precursor to a couple other molecules like L-DOPA, et cetera, that make dopamine. And so there's a misconception out there that most of the serotonin is in our gut. And most of the dopamine is in our gut. And therefore our mood is in our gut. That's not quite the way it works. Okay. we'll talk about serotonin in a moment but dopamine is synthesized from the amino acids that you eat. However, the dopamine neurons that give rise to these feelings of good or wanting more or desire and motivation, those reside in the brain. So we don't want to get too confused. We want to respect and honor the power of the gut and this vagal pathway, but it's really neurons within your brain that drive the pursuit and decision-making, so what does this mean? Well, some people make too little dopamine. Some people make so little dopamine that they need prescription dopamine. They need L-DOPA, people with Parkinson's take L-DOPA and other compounds to increase dopamine because Parkinson's is associated with deficits in movement, starts as a tremor, actually starts with some other things that are interesting. We'll talk about in a moment, but Parkinson's is a depression. It's a blunting of motivation and mood and effect, and it's a tremor. And then eventually in severe conditions it's challenges in speaking and walking so that some famous examples would be Muhammad Ali, Michael J. Fox, the great boxing trainer, Freddie Roach, like these people have Parkinson's and they at least later in their life had challenges speaking. Now it's not just fighters that develop Parkinson's as far as I know, Michael J. Fox wasn't a fighter. People can develop Parkinson's and Parkinson's is a depletion of dopamine neurons in the brain. And it's not just movement challenges. It's challenges with mood. Now, hopefully most of you all of you don't have Parkinson's, but it's clear that dietary L-tyrosine supports the healthy production of things like dopamine and as well as other factors within the brain. Now, some people immediately ask, well should I supplement L-tyrosine? So let's just talk about that because that's gonna come up. Full disclosure, I sometimes take L-tyrosine. I'm not taking it right now, but I take it only occasionally, you can buy this in capsule form. It does increase kind of a mood and elevation and alertness. It is over the counter. You have to check with your doctor. I'm not responsible for your healthcare and I'm not a doctor, whether or not it's safe for you, people with preexisting hyper dopaminergic conditions like mania should probably not take L-tyrosine. The other thing about taking L-tyrosine is there is a crash, okay? It's not a massive crash if you take it at appropriate doses and it's right for you but it can produce a crash and a lethargy and a kind of brain fog after the next day or so. And so L-tyrosine however can be ingested through foods or through supplementation to increase dopamine levels. That's well-known, taken chronically however, it can disrupt those dopamine pathways. Now there are other drugs that will increase L-tyrosine and dopamine as well. But those are severe enough that they generally tend to have addictive properties. So things like methamphetamine, things like cocaine are terrible because they really ramp up the dopamine system so much that people really can't achieve dopamine release through any other mechanisms. But food and the ingestion of L-tyrosine has a profound effect on our levels of dopamine. It takes a little while but that really will impact level of mood. Certain antidepressants fall into the category of dopaminergic antidepressants. One of the most famous ones of course is Wellbutrin. Wellbutrin with developed because a lot of the other antidepressants tend to make people feel kind of lethargic or they had side effect profiles that people didn't like. So they developed this thing that, the generic name is different, but it's generally called Wellbutrin. Wellbutrin activates dopamine and epinephrin, which is a substrate of dopamine. And both of those are involved in motivation and alertness and effort. So you might say, wow, this sounds like a great drug. However, this drug, the side effect profile tends to be the things that are associated with elevated mood and alertness. So this isn't like taking some L-tyrosine. This isn't like eating some tyrosine rich foods. This is really a much greater release of dopamine and epinephrin, and it increases things like anxiety, sweating, the pupils dilate. It has certain effects on, in particular people with epilepsy, it's been used somewhat successfully for smoking cessation, but again, it's not for everybody and I'm not here to encourage the use of these things. I'm just describing the biology and the rationale for why these drugs were developed. So let's back up a second. Let's just kind of take stock of where we're at. We have a brain body connection. There are many of them, but one of the main ones is the vagus nerve. The vagus collects information about a lot of things, breathing, heart rate stuff that's happening in the gut, et cetera, and gut by the way, includes the stomach and the intestines, sends that information up to the brain. The brain is using that information to decide one of two things, move toward something or move away. It can also pause, but essentially pausing is not moving toward. So that's the dopamine pathway and foods rich in L-tyrosine generally give us an elevated mood and make us want to do more of whatever it is that we happen to be doing as well as other things, motivation, generalizes to other things it's not unique to just ingesting foods but foods that give us a big pulse of dopamine will make us crave more of that food. It will make us crave more of the activity that led to the ingestion of that food. And as I mentioned earlier, a lot of that is happening at a subconscious level that you're not even aware of. And this is why I think the concern about hidden sugars and over ingestion of sugars is serious because it's not just that the sugars are impacting our blood glucose in negative ways. Although often it is, it's not just the obesity crisis that's happening. It's also the fact that it's disrupting our dopamine systems. Now that doesn't mean all sugar is bad. Some people have a quite healthy relationship to sugar but I think most people are just not aware that sugar isn't just operating at the level of taste it's operating at the level of neurochemicals and it's doing it subconsciously. So I'd like to talk about some of the other pathways between brain and body that regulate our moods and emotions but also are actionable. So the other neuromodulator that's really interesting in the context of the vagus is serotonin. Serotonin, just to remind you is a neuromodulator therefore it creates a bias in which neural circuits which neurons in the brain and body are going to be active and it makes it less likely the other ones are going to be active. I think it's fair to say without ever having measured it that my bulldog Costello, just his brain and body must be swimming in serotonin, because he's very calm and he eats a lot but he generally feels pretty sated. He's kind of an animal that's obsessed with comforts. He's a bit of a hedonist, and serotonin when it's elevated tends to make us feel really comfortable and kind of blissed out wherever we are. And that contrast with dopamine and epinephrin which mainly put us in pursuit of things. Motivation is pursuit. Serotonin is more about feeling really comfy where we are. The conversation around the brain body relationship and mood and serotonin for many years was, well, you eat a big meal. The gut is distended. You've got all the nutrients you need you rest and digest and serotonin is released. That's sorta true, but there's a lot more going on and a lot more that's interesting and actionable that's going on. First of all, some of you, but perhaps not all have heard that more than 90% of the serotonin that we make is in our gut. And indeed we have a lot of serotonin in our gut. We have neurons in our gut that makes serotonin. We have neurons in our brain that make serotonin, but here's the deal. Most of the serotonin that impacts our mood and our mental state is not in our gut. Most of it is in the neurons of the brain in an area called the raphae nucleus of the brain, there are a few other locations too, and those are the neurons that control whether or not we feel satiated or not. Whether or not we feel happy and calm. You can't have a discussion about serotonin without having discussion about antidepressants. Because during the late eighties and early nineties there was this explosion in the number of prescription drugs that were released. Things like first one and most famous one is Prozac, Zoloft and Paxil, a number of other ones that are so-called SSRI selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors. That's a long acronym, but basically those drugs work by preventing the gobbling up of serotonin or re-uptake of serotonin into neurons after it's been released which leads to more serotonin overall which means to elevate serotonin. And indeed those drugs were and can be very useful for certain people to feel better in cases of depression and some other clinical disorders as well. So I really don't want to dismiss them as useless or dangerous for everybody. They can be quite useful for many people. Not everyone responds well to them as I'm sure you've all heard. And their side effect profile has affects like blunting affect. It can make people feel kind of flat, kinda meh, it can reduce appetite for food. It can reduce appetite for sex. It can do all sorts of things, or it can work really well. Sometimes it's a dose-related issue, et cetera. Serotonin is fascinating however, because how well those neurons in the raphe work is impacted by some events within the gut. Although you might be surprised to find out what those events are. So let's go a little bit deeper into the gut. And again, the gut includes the stomach and then the small intestine in the large intestine and ask like, what is going on with serotonin in the gut? How is it impacting serotonin in the brain? And let's think about this in the context of how some of us might want to increase or decrease our serotonin levels. So as far as I know, there aren't any really good at home blood tests for things like serotonin and dopamine. There's some commercial products out there. But to me, just to me, I'm not particularly impressed. You know, it's not the same as getting your hormones levels measured or your metabolic factors measured, that's can be daunting. It can be done rigorously. There are tests out there. There are even some, believe it or not. There's some questionnaires that, and I think actually last year it made some of the bigger newspapers, are you more of a dopamine or a serotonin? Are you a this or that? I find that stuff to be a little silly although I do appreciate, and like the fact that people are thinking about and talking about neuromodulators there aren't really great ways to measure these things outside the clinic. There's some great clinical tools that you can get inside of a hospital or from a proper endocrinologist or neurologist, but no great at-home tool. So maybe that's a call to arms for some of you entrepreneurial folks out there to create these tests, accurate tests please, that could be done at home. But some people feel like they're too anxious or they're always in a motivated state and they're trying to adjust their serotonin. Many people adjust their serotonin by just eating more food and carbohydrate rich foods will increase serotonin. I've talked about this on a previous podcast but I personally am a big fan at least for me is I usually fast and exercise in the early part of the day I eat a relatively high protein and moderate fat zero carb or low carb meal at lunch in the afternoon to stay alert because those foods tend to favor dopamine production acetylcholine production, epinephrin production and alertness. My mood is generally pretty good most of the time. And then as evening comes around and I'm concerned about sleep and a good night's sleep, not concerned in an anxious way, but I want to get a good night's sleep. I will ingest foods that promote serotonin release because they contain a lot of tryptophan. So if I do eat meat, it would be like a white meat, turkey meat. I don't tend to, I've never liked turkey. I don't mind the animal but I don't like ingesting the meat, but starchy carbohydrates will increase serotonin. Some people also will take serotonin. You can now buy 5-HTP supplements. This is a little bit tricky. 5-HTP supplements can of course increase 5-HTP. It is 5-HTP or serotonin but that sometimes can create problems in endogenous or self-made production of serotonin. So I'm never a fan of taking things very close to the chemical you're trying to increase for very long periods of time. Maybe for occasional use. I have the problem that if I take serotonin supplements, 5-HTP, I fall asleep. The sleep I have is very intense and I wake up three or four hours later. And we know based on sleep studies with good measurements in the lab that serotonin release tends to be in the later part of the night. And so by taking it early in the night it really can disrupt the pattern of sleep in the depth of sleep. Nonetheless, some people are interested in taking serotonin to get some of the more blissed out effects. You can achieve that with foods. As I mentioned, that are carbohydrate rich. So as you're seeing this isn't really a discussion about nutrition per se. This is discussion about food which contains amino acids, amino acids being the precursors to neuromodulators and neuromodulators having a profound effect on your overall state of alertness or calmness, happiness, sadness, and wellbeing. So there are a number of things that one can take. As I mentioned, one of them being 5-HTP itself. Now I'm not recommending people take anything, but if you're interested in what this does and you want to explore this of course you'd want permission from your doctor. You can go to this free website. I love this resource. They don't pay me to say that, but I just love this resource. I've followed it for a long time called examine.com. Thank you folks at examine.com for putting this free resource out on the web that has links through what they call the human effect matrix. So it's links to all the PubMed studies for particular effects of particular compounds that one combined and just incredible as well as important health warnings. So I'm not gonna read through everything but if you were to go to examine.com as I have now and you put in 5-HTP they're only looking at things that have strong evidence. PubMed articles, articles that are in the PubMed archive. So for instance, I didn't know this, but 5-HTP produces a notable decrease in appetite, three studies. And this appetite suppression makes sense, of course, because we ingest foods to get serotonin. And if we have enough serotonin then there's no reason to ingest more foods. It tends to have a blunting of appetite. It probably does that also through other mechanisms. So I'm not saying you should do this but if someone's trying to blunt their appetite could be a interesting route, although I don't recommend chronic use, not surprisingly there's a decrease in body weight as a consequence, an increase in cortisol. So that's kind of important to note that when you typically in biology, if you pull on one string really hard and other one moves it's a little bit like a puppet in there. It's more than one string on the puppet. So it does seem to increase cortisol though they report as a minor effect. Again, links to all those are there which is why I'm not listing them out in our caption notes. You can go and get them at examine.com, put in serotonin and you'll find that. So I find it fascinating that nowadays there are things that are somewhere between doing nothing, getting serotonin from tryptophan and foods and prescription drugs. There's this other category of supplements that are really interesting for modulating these chemicals in the body. And I should mention before I move on, because I mentioned L-tyrosine I neglected to mention earlier in our discussion about dopamine, if you're interested in the dopamine pathway, go to examine.com, put in Mucuna pruriens, it's M-U-C-U-N-A, separate word, P-R-U-R-I-E-N S. It is a velvet bean that grows from vines and is very itchy to touch due to serotonin on its surface. Amazing, this bean has serotonin on its surface and indeed serotonin at if you were to put it on your skin would cause some irritation of the skin, amazing. Inside the bean is L-DOPA, Mucuna pruriens is not just something that promotes dopamine release because of some weird mystical ancient thing or whatever, or sorcery. It is chemically L-DOPA the precursor to dopamine. It contains some other molecules as well and low levels of other psychoactives. This stuff is available over the counter. Incredible. I personally find it incredible. Its effects are really interesting. I'm not gonna read them all off but I mentioned these effects not because I'm encouraging you to take it but because you get a window into what dopamine, acute dopamine increase does in the non-Parkinsonian context. And you can start to think about foods that are rich in L-tyrosine as biasing certain effects or not others. So when you hear food is medicine, food isn't really medicine. Food is food, but food has these chemical effects as well. So first one listed is three studies with very high rigor that overall have a minor effect on of all things, sperm quality. So it appears that sperm motility itself, I'm assuming when they say sperm quality I don't know what features of sperm of quality they looked at with sperm, that's not discussion I want to have, but I'm assuming it's motility because I know enough about reproductive biology to know that sperm ability to swim depends on some proteins that are present in the front of the sperm, et cetera things like contractions and sperm motility is generally associated with sperm quality. Sperm that don't move are generally not very useful sperm. Symptoms of Parkinson disease are are notably degraded with Mucuna pruriens. So fascinating. That's not surprising. And there are a lot of other effects here. Feelings of subjective wellbeing, testosterone, reductions in prolactin, not surprising. Prolactin is a hormone that's involved in milk letdown, it's in lactating mothers. It's involved in feelings of peace and generally is antagonistic to sexual desire in both men and female. So it's really interesting that things like Mucuna pruriens which are L-DOPA reduce prolactin, increased sperm motility, increased testosterone, subjective wellbeing. So you're starting to see a theme, right? Dopamine really makes us motivated. Feel in pursuit, makes us feel good. Serotonin makes us feel more relaxed and calm. Now this whole month is about emotion. So you might be thinking, well, wait where are we going with all this as it relates to emotions. But in the last episode I said something I'm gonna repeat it now briefly, which is that much of what we talk about is good emotions or bad emotions. There's a context to that. There's a social context. We can't really say an emotion is good or bad. Grieving at a funeral is healthy. Being happy at a funeral, assuming you loved the person that died is most people probably wouldn't think that was healthy. So we can't really say that certain emotions like sadness or happiness are healthy. It's context is important. Cultural context is important. Many of you have asked for book recommendations. This is an opportunity to raise a mention of another book. Again, I don't have any financial affiliation or anything but if you want to read more about emotions and how the context and cultural things impact our emotions I'm a huge fan of Lisa Feldman Barrett. I learned about her from the Lex Fridman Podcast. I've had discussions with her on my Instagram Live, she's at Northeastern University, a world expert in emotions. Her first book is "How Emotions Are Made" This is not a book she sent me. I paid for this with my own money years ago, bought it, read it, loved it long before I met Lisa, I'm just delighted that we've got to known each other a little bit. It's a really interesting read into the psychology of emotions and some of the subjectivity of emotions. So, whereas I'm talking about mainly the biology of emotions this gets a little bit more into the psychology and the biology as well. And Lisa's just terrific. She's also putting a lot of information out into the world about emotion. So if you want to learn more about that check out her work, again, it's Lisa Feldman Barrett. And that book is "How Emotions Are Made" Hopefully she'll continue to write many more books. So now you understand the relationship I hope between foods and dopamine, foods and serotonin and that they're both being communicated to the brain via the vagus, right? We ingest these foods, these supplements are things people take, they don't put them directly into the brain. They put them in our gut. So yes, there's a gut brain connection but it's not about the serotonin in the gut that makes you feel calm and placid. It's not about the dopamine in the gut. It's just been oversold that way because I think there's something really attractive. And I understand about the idea that because certain things about our experience of life and our emotions is happening in our body. That maybe we have a little more control, right? Because this thing is a hard container. We can't just stuff some dopamine in there. I could probably take a Mucuna pruriens bean and stuff it in my ear, please don't do that. It'd make my ear itchy because of the serotonin on the outside. But you can't get stuff in there. What you have to do is ingest things that are metabolized in certain ways that communicate to the brain or so maybe they pass into the brain themselves across what's called the blood brain barrier. I'll talk about the blood brain barrier in a minute. It's actually called the BBB. So it ends up sounding like baby, BBB. I guess that's like BB, anyway, BBB, but they're also nerves in the gut that are sensing the nutrient contents of food and then saying, oh, you should feel better and want more. Oh, that's got a lot of bitterness and acid taste to it. You should want less of that. So as I transitioned out of the discussion about dopamine and serotonin in the gut hopefully you've got some actionable items there under your belt, pun intended, where you can understand how certain foods and certain nutrients and you can look these up, might impact your mood. If you're somebody who's really anxious and really wired. Well, then the dopamine adrenaline pathway epinephrine pathway is probably not one that you want to lean on any harder. If you tend to be someone who's pretty passive and you're having trouble with motivation. Well then think about ramping up the dopamine pathway through, I always think behaviors and proper food choices is the best way to start. And behaviors include things like exercise, et cetera. But one of the problems with the discussion around mood and exercise or mood and meditation is that it's so subjective. It's like, I love certain forms of exercise and not others. Certain ones are aversive to me. Certain ones are attractive to me, and it's never really clear. No one's ever told me. Okay, you have to do 10 minutes on the bike at X number of RPM at so-and-so or on the skier in order to get your dopamine up. But we can actually say, if you ingest more L-tyrosine there's a high probability that you're going to make more dopamine. And I'm talking about ingesting it through food or through supplementation if you like. Mucuna pruriens, I've tried. I should just mention it was too dopaminergic for me. I got really, really jazzed up and then a severe crash for me the next day. But that's, I think because I tend to ride pretty high on the kind of alertness and motivation scale. I'm always being told by Costello and other people in the podcast studio to slow my speech down. This is me uncaffeinated, and I could probably afford a little more serotonin in my life. So, whereas Costello, he can afford to wake up every couple of days and just say hello to us. This dog sleeps more than any other creature. It's remarkable. So there are things that we can do and they're actionable. And they are in some ways they're quantitative because you can regulate dosages and you can regulate amounts and you can regulate timing. And everyone has to play with these things and figure out what's right for them in terms of feeding. And everyone has to explore and understand what's safe and right for them. But, and of course, exercise is still very important. I talked about social connection in the last episode super important for activation of serotonin but when it comes to this gut brain, body brain relationship, what we eat really matters in terms of the neurochemicals that we make. So let's talk a little bit more about things that we ingest in our body and then allow our body to inform our brain to shift our mood. And this is something I've been doing for years. And I just want to say I've found to be a complete game changer. There's excellent science to support it. And I think most people are familiar with it in a different context but I don't think most people know this simple fact which is that the omega-3 to omega-6 fatty acid ratio has a profound effect on depression. It has a profound effect on mood so much so that in a double-blind placebo controlled study that I will provide the link too, this was a study first published in 2008 but there've been many others as well. First of all, an experiment done in animals. They found there's a model of learned helplessness in animals. It's not very kind to the animals, but they put rats or mice in a jar. They let them swim and they'll swim, swim, swim to try and save their life. And eventually they give up, it's a learned helplessness. They don't let them drown, they take them out. Adjusting the omega-3 omega-6 ratio so that the omega-3's are higher led to less learned helplessness, meaning these animals would swim longer. Now that's an animal. That's a rat, not a particularly kind study, but that same study was essentially done in humans although they didn't have them swim to the point of near drowning. What they did is they took people who were clinically depressed, major depression. Major depression is severe maladaptive state meaning it inhibits job, relationships, appetite, all sorts of negative health effects. And they did a comparison of a thousand milligrams a day of EPA. So EPA is one of the elements that contains high levels of omega-3's that's in things like fish oil, I'll talk about other sources in a little bit but it wasn't a thousand milligrams of fish oil. It was a thousand milligrams of EPA. Compared that to 20 milligrams of Fluoxetine which is Prozac, okay. Really increases serotonin. And in this study of 60 individuals, again, I'll provide the links to the study. They found that they were equally effective in reducing depressive symptoms. So imagine that, a food-based compound that you can't make without, right, this is not a situation where you can make your own omega-3s. You have to get them from food sources or from supplementation, was as effective as 20 milligrams of fluoxetine over the course of eight weeks. And what was really interesting in addition to that is that the combination of a thousand milligrams of EPA and Fluoxetine had a synergistic effect in lowering depressive symptoms. I find this remarkable. I heard about this when it first came out and I wasn't sure what to make of it. 'Cause there are a lot of studies that come out and I generally like to focus my changes in behavior around things where there's a large center of mass. There's a lot of information. A couple years later, I did in fact start taking a thousand milligrams per day of EPA in fish oil. Now there are a few side effects of fish oil. People who have blood, who are bleeders who have Factor V Leiden mutations or in women who are taking birth control, which can affect blood clotting and things of that sort really should talk to your doctor make sure it's okay for you. Fish oil also can give people fishy breath which is pretty gross, frankly, but there are now fish oils that either because of the Encapsulations or because they put some lemon flavoring in there doesn't have that effect. In any event, a thousand milligrams per day of EPA. I started ingesting that regularly. I just felt better. I wasn't clinically depressed, but I generally, I did feel at least for me, an increase in mood and affect. And a number of other things it's supposed to reduce inflammation. The cardiovascular effects are controversial for a long time everyone thought the effects on platelets were really terrific. Then there were articles that came out in major newspapers saying maybe not so much but the effects on mood are really profound. And now there are lots of studies. If you go into PubMed and you were to put EPA or fish oil and depression you would find that there were a number of really impressive results showing that it's at least as effective as certain SSRI antidepressants at these dosages and it can amplify or improve the effect of low dosages of some of these SSRIs. So I feel like more people should know about this. This is nutrition, but it's profoundly affecting mood and depression is terrible, right? Depression can have a component of anxiety in some cases where people are they feel lousy and very uncertain. That's kind of how I talk about depression with anxiety is you talk to someone who is anxious and you can tell them everything's gonna be okay. And they're always concerned about what they might not know. You don't really know the plane isn't gonna crash. You don't really know that life is gonna go okay. And in some sense, they're right, no one has a crystal ball or can predict the future, but they tend to perseverate or fixate on the uncertainty. And then of course there are the versions of depression that involve certainty. People are lethargic and they're certain they say, yeah, I'm certain, I'm never gonna get another job. I'm certain, I'm never gonna meet anyone new. I'm certain I'm gonna fail. So there's this kind of a divide in the sphere of depression around certainty and uncertainty. But what's interesting is this thousand milligrams per day or more of EPA has been shown to relieve both forms of depression. Now, does that mean it's gonna work for everybody? No, I'm not here to try and play psychiatrist. I want to point you in the direction of these manuscripts so that you can make informed choices for yourself. You can discuss it with your doctor and family and make the choices that are right for you. But here's what's especially interesting about the heart effects, because we've heard that these omega-3s, which of course you can get from other sources too, you can get from fatty fish, they're in flax seeds, hemp seeds. There are a number of chia seeds, these kinds of things but the levels of EPA that are required are quite high. So this thousand milligrams per day is that's pretty hard to get from food although it can be done depending on what you're eating. What's interesting is that the heart effects that are solid that really stand up in the literature have a lot more to do with something we talked about in a previous episode. And I'll mention again, which is heart rate variability. So we know that having a heart rate that's really high or heart rate, that's really low. Neither of those are good. A lot of people think, oh you just want a low heart rate, big stroke volume. You know, if you're running a lot you may have 30 or 40 beats per minute. That's great to be in shape but you still want heart rate variability. It has a lot to do with the tone of the autonomic nervous system talked about last time. How, when you inhale, it speeds up heart rate. When you exhale, it decreases heart rate. That's called respiratory sinus arrhythmia. That's the basis of heart rate variability. We'll maybe do a short post about this. So you can get all the mechanism and the behaviors that spill out of that that might be useful for you. But the point is heart rate variability. HRV is good. And what's interesting is that there was a study in 2009 that showed that people who eat a diet where they fail to supplement in a way that there's a high omega-6 to three ratio, so not enough omega-3s, not only are there markers of an inflammatory cytokines, elevated things like IL-6 and TNF-alpha, but they tend to be non-responders to antidepressants. Shifting that omega-3 omega-6 ratio did a couple things. First of all, increasing the amount of EPA shifted the ratio. So it was higher omega-3 to omega-6 ratio, which was good, lowered the inflammation markers, and then allowed antidepressants to have their effect, even at low doses. And here's the really interesting thing. It worked by increasing heart rate variability, and you think, well, how in the world would this happen? But you know how I mean, that's a ton of effects but the way it works is because of the way that these things are impacting the gut and the autonomic nervous system. Remember earlier, I said, the vagus includes connections from the heart signaling about sensory information about how fast the heart is beating to the brain not just stuff on the lungs, but information from the heart and the brain then adjusts heart rate by heart rate variability. So it's incredible that there's a way that one can use the gut, the ingestion of more of these EPA's, either through food or supplementation to increase rate variability and thereby to improve symptoms, meaning reduce symptoms of depression, and to even make low levels of antidepressants that wouldn't otherwise work work. And I think I like this study so much because a, it's super cool. It bridges the brain body access. It incorporates nutrition and micronutrients in the brain but also because it really points to something that we hear all the time, which is our body is a whole system. It's working as a whole system and the brain isn't working in isolation up there in the skull. It's reacting to things that are happening in the body in the gut and in the heart rate and heart rate variability. And that the things we ingest can have a profound effect on them. Now, of course, I really want to emphasize something which is that no one compound or nutrient or supplement or drug or behavior for that matter is going to be the be all end all of shifting out of depression or improving one's mood or improving sleep. It's a constellation of things. And this is especially true when people start to get excited about supplements and drugs of all kinds and their potential for various things. Right now, there's a lot of excitement about psychedelics and their therapeutic uses. And I think great, but as a good friend of mine who's a physician clinician says better living through chemistry still requires better living. You cannot expect to take a compound regardless of source or potency and have it completely shift your experience of life without having to continue to engage in the proper behaviors, all the things we know proper sleep, exercise, social connection, food, et cetera. There are many others as well. So I still find that this collection of studies about omega-3 to omega-6 ratios to be profoundly important so much so that it's completely changed the way that I think about food, the foods I eat, I do supplement. I don't necessarily that think that's for everybody but I really think it's incredible that there are these compounds that have these robust effects on our feelings of wellbeing. And there are others too. So that thousand milligram per day threshold of fish oil that's beneficial requires that one take a reasonable amount of these things, either through food or through supplementation. I acknowledge that not everyone wants to take fish oil. There are a couple of reasons why one might want to avoid that. One would be for ethical reasons. You have an emotional relationship or a relationship to the environment that makes you not want to ingest fish related products. There's krill oil. Krill is still an organism. It's a little tiny thing that whales eat a lot of and people generally eat very little of. So krill is out there, I personally, just me, I don't know why, I didn't react well to krill. It didn't make me feel very good. I had some like kind of skin itches and things like that. And they stopped when I stopped taking it but I don't want to bias you against it. If that's your preference. Some people really like krill oil as a source of omega-3s. I did mention some of the other sources like chia seeds and flax seeds, but as you'll notice these are not things that we tend to ingest a lot of on a regular basis. It is possible to get omega-3s from meats. If the animals have grazed on grasses that contain a lot of omega-3s. So for those of you that ingest meat you're the source of those meat is gonna be very important as it relates to omega-3s. Even within the category of fish oil there's a concern sometimes about mercury and other contaminants. You want to go with a brand that emphasizes that they've gone to really good sources and that they decontaminate regardless. And so you have to search out those brands. There is a test that you can do as to whether or not the fish oil is a rancid or not. Some people take it in liquid form. Some people take in capsule form. The liquid form is gonna be more affordable. The capsule form is more is a little easier and a little more portable. You can actually just chew one of the gel tablets. And if it tastes really fishy kind of rancid, you'll know it's disgusting. You want to spit it out. And if it doesn't and it's tolerable then you'll know that that it's okay. Unfortunately you have to buy it first in order to do that. Although, I don't know, maybe you can get them to open up the bottle for you in the store and tell them you want to try it. Someday perhaps fish oil and omega-3, it'll be like tasting wine at a restaurant where you can send it back for now. I think you have to purchase it first, but find a brand you trust in like, and then work with them. If you decide to go that route of course. There are other compounds that are also interesting for mood elevation that are essentially like foods or are supplement based that now, fortunately, there are really good data from peer reviewed studies. And the next one I want to mention because I think it's really interesting is L-carnitine. Now, L-carnitine has been around a long time and it's been discussed in the context of heart health and a number of other things. It was actually being touted as a bit of a weight loss agent in the early nineties, but L-carnitine actually has some really impressive effects on depression. And again, we will look to PubMed because looking at examine.com is essentially for me anyway looking at PubMed, what is L-carnitine okay. L-carnitine is most prevalent in meat and in beef in particular. Now for the vegans, please know that L-carnitine is available through non-meat sources as well. Although it's not as enriched in non-meat sources. It's a really interesting molecule because acetylcarnitine is essentially what's made from L-carnitine but it's acetylated. If you're interested in the biochemistry, you can look that up, it's acetylated into a form that can cross the blood-brain barrier. The blood-brain barrier or BBB is a barrier. It's a wall around the brain and you have this barrier because the brain is so important. And it has this feature that the neurons there don't recreate themselves after injury, like other organs of the body. There's not a lot of turnover of cells despite what you might've heard. And so nature has created this BBB, this blood brain barrier to make sure that certain molecules in particular, large molecules don't get across the blood-brain barrier. 'Cause it can be damaging to those tissues. Incidentally, you also have a very rigid or stringent barrier around other organs, which are the gonads. So the ovaries and the testes and the brain are the organs of the body that nature has gone out of its way to protect, give this additional layer of the blood-brain barrier or as you might imagine for the testes and the ovaries, it's going to be the blood gonadal barrier. So these barriers exist to make it such that just because you eat something, just because you ingest it doesn't mean it's going to cross the blood-brain barrier, but L-carnitine when taken is acetylated and converted into this form that gets across the blood-brain barrier. And it has a lot of effects, it's involved in mitochondrial activation of long chain fatty acids which that's a big mouthful, that we'll get into some time when we're talking about metabolic, but it has some interesting effects on the neuro side. So if you decide to check it out on examine.com you'll see some really interesting things, lots of effects on ammonia, C-reactive proteins, things of that sort, blood glucose is lowered, et cetera. That's all stuff that's the level of blood and periphery, slight effects in lowering cholesterol. Here's some interesting ones. Rates of pregnancy go way up when people are taking L-carnitine both the father and the mother but the source of sperm and the source of egg are affected in ways that favors pregnancy. It does increase, here we go again with sperm quality sperm motility in males and it seems to have positive effects on females that have polycystic ovary syndrome. So check that out. You know, the effects are very strong. There are three studies listed there. Again, I'm not promoting this, but that that people take L-carnitine, especially if you're trying to get pregnant but check it out because the effects there and the studies that are mentioned are published in peer reviewed rigorous journals. In terms of the neural effects. Those are quite interesting. The effects on depression are still emerging but they do seem to exist that people feel a notable decrease in depressive symptoms. There are seven studies listed on examine.com that it has a notable benefit in a variety of circumstances where participants have heightened depression already. They start taking L-carnitine and they start feeling better. And they talk about dosages in those various studies. It also has been shown to have a notable decrease in the symptoms of autism, which I find fascinating. Also again, the things we ingest impact the chemicals in our brain and how they impact the rest of our body. There's other things that's been used to treat certain forms of alcohol dependence. I think this is going to be a very exciting emerging area. We're gonna do a whole month about addiction. I've got a great guest lined up for that month, but there's now an emerging field about what people can take and supplement to help ease the cravings and the withdrawal when trying to quit drugs of abuse, like cocaine, alcohol, heroin, and smoking and things of that sort. So really interesting area. This is, I like to think is the early days and we're gonna discover a lot more. There's a huge list of things here. Since we talked about pain on a previous episode and I know a lot of people have written to me about fibromyalgia. It does L carnitine has been shown to reduce symptoms of fibromyalgia. Again, all the links to studies are on examine.com, totally free site. And that was my bulldog being a battering ram. There's nothing graceful about this bulldog. He's decided he wanted to leave to go get a drink of water. And so please forgive the noise. Okay. So now let's turn to another aspect of the gut-brain relationship that will surprise you, in some cases might shock you. And that has some really cool and actionable biology. And that's the gut microbiome, probiotics and prebiotics. I know today we're talking about emotions and not pain but I'd be remiss if I didn't mention another effect of acetylcarnitine that's been reported and that you can find listed with link to study on examine.com which is its effect in reducing the symptoms of migraine. This was a randomized controlled trial with 133 participants who had frequent migraines. They were taking 500 milligrams of L-carnitine or nothing for 12 weeks. So the control is a little bit, the control experiment there is a little bit tricky but it had a significant effect on reducing the number of migraine attacks per month. So I find that really interesting and there's a lot more listed there about the study. And I think these compounds are powerful. They carry risks for certain people, not for others. So again, you have to find out what's right for you but I do think they are super interesting as potential therapeutics for various people. So what's the deal with the gut microbiome and the gut brain axis. Today we've actually been talking a lot already about the gut brain axis that has nothing to do with microbiomes. We've been talking about this vagus nerve that connects providing sensory information from the body to the brain. And then the brain also sends in the same nerve motor information to control the motility that got the heart rate how fast we breathe and deployment of immune stuff killer cells and things of that sort. But oftentimes when we hear about the gut brain axis these days, it's a discussion about the gut microbiome. And once again, we're in a situation where there's incredible biology, I'm very happy there's so much discussion about the gut microbiome. I am somewhat dismayed and concerned that most of what I hear out there is either false or partially false. So we're gonna clear up some of the misconceptions, first by understanding the biology. And then we're going to talk about some of the actionable items. It is true that we have a lot of these little microorganisms living in our gut. They're not there because they want to help us. They don't have brains, they are adaptive however, they try and find and create environments that make it easier for them to proliferate. So they don't care about you and me but they are perfectly willing to exploit you and me in order to make more of themselves the same way viruses are, viruses don't have a mind, they infect cells, they hijack the genome, and they use that genome to make more of themselves. The microbiota that live in us vary along the length of our digestive tract. But let's just take a step back and think about how our body plan is made. We are actually a series of tubes. Our brain is actually a tube. You see, it's all squishy on the outside. And then it's got that long thing. The spinal cord that goes down to the base of the spine. That's the central nervous system that all started out as a tube. It just looks like a cauliflower on the other end up in the brain because the tube is so big and it has to be crammed into the skull. So it gets all wrinkled up. But if we were to splay it out you'd find that it's just one big tube. Similarly, our digestive tract and our airways are essentially one big tube. It starts with our mouth, also our nose. And then we have all these other tubes. They go down through our throat and then into our stomach and then into our various intestines. And then the tube ends out the other end. So we are one long tube for digestion. And inside of that tube is a mucosal lining. It's these little microvilli, tiny, tiny, tiny little like velvety ends of cells that are able to move and move things along and mucus mucosa. And the conditions of that mucosal lining set a number of different things. It sets the rate of our digestion and the quality of our digestion. It sets for instance, our immune system. Most people probably don't realize this, but most infections in the environment have to get into our body somehow. Some of them are inhaled. A lot of them go into our mouth and lodge in the mucosal lining of the mouth. And then infection start there. You probably had the experience, unfortunately, of you know, feeling like you have a tick in your throat, like something's irritating your throat. And then it kind of migrates up into a head cold or runny nose. Sometimes it'll start as headache. Sometimes it won't, but things that are inert can migrate down into the gut. So we're ingesting things all the time. Think about air, bacteria, viruses, they're making their way into our gut. And some of those bacteria live in the gut. And some of those bacteria bias the mucosal lining in the gut, stomach and intestines to be more acidic or more basic so that they can make more of themselves so they can replicate. They like a particular comfort. It's like they like a particular kind of bedding to lie down in and create more of themselves. Now, some of those those mucosal linings that they promote make us feel better. They make us feel more alert. They bolster our immune system and others make us feel worse. So first rule, the microbiome isn't good or bad. Some of these little bugs that live in us do bad things to us. They make us feel worse. They lower our immunity. They affect us in negative ways. Some of them make us feel better and they do that mainly by changing the conditions of our gut environment. In addition to that, they do impact the neurotransmitters and the neurons that live in the gut. And that signal up to the brain to impact things like dopamine and serotonin that we've been talking about previously. So there's a vast world now devoted to try and understand what sources of food what kinds of foods are good or not good for the gut microbiome? So let's just talk about some general rules of thumb related to the research quality research that's peer reviewed. And then in a future episode we will go far deeper into the gut microbiome and gut brain axis. But here's a few things that I think you might find surprising. First of all, supporting a healthy gut microbiome is good for mood, great for digestion and great for immune system function. However, that does not mean maxing out or taking the most probiotic and prebiotic that you can possibly manage. As I mentioned many times before I do believe in probiotics, I take probiotics but there are studies that show that if you take lots and lots of certain probiotics like lactobacillus and you really ramp up the levels more it is not a case of more is better. There are things like brain fog that can come from that, brain fog is just this inability to focus. People feel really not well generally. Some of those studies are a little bit controversial but I think it's fair to say that if people really increase the amount of probiotic that they're taking beyond a certain amount then they start feeling foggy in the mind. Now what's too much? Well I get probiotics I mentioned before from Athletic Greens, you can get them from fermented foods like sauerkraut, pickles, kimchi natto, these are different sources from around the world. Actually, I'd love to hear some of the other sources that people know other foods from around the world. I'm fascinated by the way in which different cultures have all arrived at these foods that provide and support healthy microbiomes because they're fermented. I have a colleague at Stanford, Justin Sonnenberg, and he and I have talked about this. I don't want to quote him inappropriately, but we've had discussions about it, and they've published that the ingestion of fermented foods is one of the best ways to support healthy levels of gut microbiota without exceeding the threshold that would cause things like brain fog. So foods and fermented foods are going to be the best source. And there are a number of different ways that one could do that. Some people don't like fermented foods, however some people supplement it. So it isn't a case of more is better. So we know that. The other is that it is true that healthy gut microbiota have been shown to improve symptoms of certain psychiatric illnesses as well as certain conditions like particular features along the autism spectrum, which is interesting. And those effects are probably due to not just improvement of immune system function, but to the the conditions in which the neurons that sense nutrients convey information to the brain and increase levels of serotonin and or dopamine. So gut microbiome provides kind of a foundation for healthy gut and healthy gut brain access so much so that some people report that when they start eating small bits 'cause it doesn't require a lot of fermented foods, that their overall mood is better, not unlike the effects of EPA. Although I don't think it's been looked at directly in the context of clinical depression yet. And if someone knows of a study please mention it in the comments. That would be terrific. There are some things that you can do to really damage your gut microbiome. And this is where there's a huge misconception that I want to clear up. There was a study that was published in "Nature", which is among the three top journals that we have in science. You know, "Nature", "Science" and "Cell" are considered the top tops, but excellent journal that showed that artificial sweeteners but a particular artificial sweetener which was saccharin can disrupt the gut microbiome in ways that is detrimental to a number of different health markers, increasing inflammatory cytokines and all the other bad things that happen when the gut microbiome is thrown off kilter. That study was widely discussed but there were a few things that were not mentioned there that are really important. That study was about saccharin in particular. Saccharin is not the most typical artificial sweetener that's used, the most typical artificial sweeteners that are used are things like aspartame, so-called NutraSweet or Sucralose, or these days Stevia, there's monk fruits, to my knowledge and please correct me if anyone knows of any studies, to my knowledge, the negative effects of these artificial sweeteners on the gut microbiome were restricted to saccharin. Now there is enough chemical similarity between saccharin and some of the other ones that I mentioned, but not all of them. For instance, Stevia, monk fruit are distinct in their chemical makeup so that they probably don't have if they have any, have lower effects, negative effects on the gut microbiome, but it should still be tested. So saccharin is really, it was shown in this study and several other studies can really negatively impact the quality of the gut microbiome. Interestingly, the narrative around artificial sweeteners and gut microbiome is incorrect. Most people thought, oh, saccharin is bad for the microbiome. It must kill the microbiome. And so you hear people saying, oh, artificial sweeteners kill the microbiome. That's not true at all. In fact, in that very same study published in nature they showed that the negative affects of saccharin on the microbiome could be blocked or eliminated by giving antibiotics. So what happens is certain artificial sweeteners in particular saccharin disrupt the microbiome and make the environment within the gut that mucosal lining more favorable to bacteria microbiota that are not good for the organism. This is an important distinction. It's not just a language thing where people say, oh, you know, it kills the microbiome. It doesn't kill the microbiome. It shifts the microbiome and shifts in the microbiome can be good or they can be bad. And that takes us to another topic that's a bit of a hot button topic but I'm willing to go there. 'Cause I think it deserves conversation, which is nowadays there are many examples out there where people have switched from a kind of standard diet or even a vegetarian diet to a vegan diet, to a keto diet. Now keto doesn't necessarily have to mean the ingestion of meats, but it can. And they experience positive effects for themselves. Not everybody. And I've talked previously about some of the kind of the incorrect, what I believe is incorrect marketing of keto as it relates to the cosmetic effects and some of the challenges with sleep that some people have but some people love keto and it works great for them. But the ketogenic diet is interesting because when one shifts to the ketogenic diet there is a shift in the gut microbiome. And some people end up feeling better. Some people end up feeling worse. Likewise, some people go from ingesting animal products including meat or they're vegetarian and they go to vegan and they experience positive shifts in mood and affect. And we know that the transition to a more plant-based diet and especially the enrichment of fiber that's present in those diets also creates dramatic shifts in the gut microbiome. Some people feel better doing that. Some people feel worse. And of course, it's gonna depend on whether or not you're ingesting a lot of processed foods or not. There was a paper published in "Cell", "Cell Press" journal obviously, excellent journal, showing that ingestion of processed foods, regardless of whether or not they come from animal sources or non-animal sources the processed foods themselves tend to create activity within the body and this surely has roots in the nervous system that lead to over-consumption of calories and weight gain. Even some weight gain that couldn't be explained by increased calories. In other words, processed foods are bad, regardless of whether or not you're talking about animal products or non animal products, probably not surprising given what you know about these sugar sensing and other amino acid sensing cells in the gut that we talked about earlier. So the point of all this is that when I say you have to find what's right for you, that's not a throwaway statement. Some people's microbiome and the lining of their mucosa, excuse me, their mucosa lining of their throat, of their gut, of their nose, everything is improved by diets that are heavily meat based and don't have many plants. Other people do much better on a plant-based diet without many meat products or animal products. It's highly individual. And this probably has roots in genetic makeup. This probably has roots in what people were raised on because remember the nervous system of course is set up by your genetic, your genes, your genetic program but your nervous system adapts early in life to your conditions. That's what it's for, the reason you have a nervous system is to move your body appropriately towards things that are good for you and away from things that are not. But also it was designed to adapt. The early life period has this incredible thing about plasticity that we spent a whole month on so that it can change so that yes indeed some people may like certain foods and react to certain foods better than others because of the way that their nervous system was wired. This enteric as it's called nervous system that lines the gut and the communicates with the brain. So most of what I've talked about today is kind of black and white. These are things that are present in all of us, the sugar sensing neurons of the gut, the way the vagus is wired. The fact that omega-3 omega-6 is tend to improve. The ratios tend to impact mood with high omega-3. omega-6 ratios improving mood. We talked about all sorts of things in the gut brain and body brain axis, but when it comes to the microbiome the key thing is that we all have a microbiome. You want a microbiome, but you want to promote the microbiome that is right for you. And that can be shifted and steered by ingesting certain categories of foods and not others. And one thing that really frustrates me is when the people show up with an agenda, like all meat agenda or a vegan agenda or a keto agenda, and they talk about these positive effects on the gut microbiome. And it's all true, frankly. And so it's highly individual. Now this doesn't get to any of the ethical issues around animals or the planet, and you hear rabid debates about that on both sides. And I am not qualified or equipped to talk about whether or not regenerative agriculture, animal products, or farming or any of these things, how those actually impact the environment, that is not my expertise, but when it comes to your health and your microbiome you want to support the microbiome. It's very clear that these fermented foods support the microbiome that we should be ingesting at least two servings per day. Which is quite a lot that supplementation at low levels can be good. Supplementation at high levels can create this brain fog even though some people say that result is controversial. I've experienced this myself and the data looked to me pretty darn solid. So that's one thing to think about as well. And the other thing about the gut microbiome is that it's highly contextual based on other things that you're doing. So even things like exercise and social well-being and connection, those things are also impacting the gut microbiome. So find the diet that's right for you. And that works for you in the context of the other ethical and lifestyle choices that are important to you. That's my advice. A note about fasting. I have a colleague at Yale, who's an expert in the gut microbiome. And he told me something really interesting, which is when we fast, we actually digest certain components within our dietary tract. It actually depletes a good amount of the gut microbiome. And this is interesting. I've had good results from I guess you would call it intermittent or kind of circadian type fasting where I've never done long fast, but where I push out my first meal by a few hours my first meal is generally around lunchtime or so but the longer periods of fasting that go for a day or two or three days are known to deplete the gut microbiome in major ways. But that's not always necessarily a bad thing because when it's replenished, it often is replenished at levels that exceeded its previous level. But I think that some of the GI tract and even some of the mental effects of returning to eating after feeding sometimes people don't feel so good when they start eating. They really want food, but then they start eating again. They don't feel as good as they did on the fast. Some of that may be related to the depletion of the microbiome that occurs during long fast. So again, this is something to think about and talk about with your doctor, but the idea that fasting across the board is good. There may be some merits to that, and certainly in some cases, but it does deplete the microbiome and that depletion of the microbiome is significant because it means when you return to eating, you're actually not in the same position to digest and assimilate those foods. And those foods are not in the same position to impact your brain and body the same way they were prior to the fast. And this is, I think why people suggest a kind of gradual transition back to consuming nutrients after a fast. So as we round up, I want to share some results with you That without question will impact the way that you respond to food mentally and even physically. And I know that because that's the central theme of the studies I'm about to tell you about. I have a colleague at Stanford, Alia Crum, who's done some remarkable experiments on mindset. And some people could think about these as placebo effects or belief effects, but they actually go way beyond those terms. And there are a number of different examples of this that Aaliyah's lab and her coworkers have demonstrated. But two that are particularly interesting to me I Want to share with you now because they really emphasize how our beliefs can really impact the way that our brain and body work together. I think the most famous of these is an experiment they did where they had two groups of individuals. They were each given a milkshake and they had some factors measured from their blood by an IV while they ingested the milkshake. And then afterwards as well. And one of the factors that they were looking at was something called grehlin, G-H-R-E-L-I-N. Grehlin is a peptide that increases with hunger. So the longer you haven't eaten that grehlin goes up. And I know some of you say, well, I fast, I fast, I fast and I eventually lose my appetite. Well, grehlin still goes up and then it drops. So if you were one of these people that eats every three hours regularly, grehlin kind of gets a little pulse as you get to that two hour and 50 minute mark. So it's a little bit of a timer as well. It's really interesting peptide. In any event, what they did is they gave people milkshakes, two groups, one group got a shake that they were told it was a low calorie, healthy shake. The other got a milkshake that they were told it was the very decadent high calorie shake. I think it was something like two or maybe even two and a half times as many calories as the other. Perhaps even more, I don't recall the details, but you got a high calorie and a low calorie condition. And then they drank the shake and then they measured grehlin in these subjects' blood. And what they found was that the high calorie shake had a much more robust effect on blunting grehlin and reducing grehlin. But the interesting thing you probably guessed already is that it was the exact same shake given to both groups. So people's belief about the content of something impacted their physiology. And this speaks to the so-called top down mechanisms or modulation of our physiology. In a previous episode about pain we talked about the effects of obsessive believe it or not, it was an obsessive infatuation and love on pain responses and pain thresholds. This is yet another example where beliefs or subjective feelings can impact physiology at the level of the periphery, because grehlin is released in the periphery in the body. Now, these beliefs affects extend beyond examples like this, another good example that I'd like to share is Alia, Dr. Crum, and her colleagues did an experiment where they took housekeepers, they were essentially hotel workers, divide them into two groups. They had them watch a short film. In one case, the film was about how their work was important to help people feel comfortable in the hotel, et cetera, et cetera. The other group heard that the activity that they were doing cleaning and taking care of the hotel was good for them. It was good for their health, et cetera, et cetera. They controlled very nicely in the study for health parameters, for individual differences. And for the behaviors of these people in the period that followed this short tutorial. And what they found was eight weeks later, the group that had been told that the activity was good for them showed lower blood pressure. They had lost a significant amount of body fat and they reported enjoying their work far more than the other group. The same work, simply biased mentally by the information that they were given, but their physiology followed that information. And so this is not just the placebo effect. This is an incredible set of findings that illustrate the extent to which whether or not we believe a food is gonna be good for us or not good for us. Well, we can't escape the reality. You can't tell yourself that a poison is gonna be good for you and ingest that poison and expect it to not kill you, nor can you tell yourself that eating 12 croissants, I confess I've done it, it was after a very long run, a long time ago but you can't tell yourself that that's necessarily going to be good for you or that it's gonna make you lose weight. These belief effects are not about lying to yourself in these cases, in these experiments as you'll notice that subjects didn't have prior knowledge about grehlin or about the effects of their daily routine on weight loss and blood pressure. So in order for them to work you have to be naive to the information, right? You can't simply lie to yourself and tell yourself what you want to believe and that's important, but also important is that the mind and the body are in this fascinating interplay. And today we've talked mainly about how the body and things that we put inside this tube, that runs from our mouth to the other end to our rectum, basically is impacting all these cells, these neurons, microbiota in their mucosal lining, heart, lungs and how all that information is feeding up to the brain to impact how we feel up here. But also how we feel up here is impacting how our body reacts at levels of very core physiology that you couldn't just tell yourself that this was gonna work, but what you believe about certain substances, certain foods, certain nutrients does have a profound effect on the magnitude of their impact and sometimes even the quality and direction of that impact. Well, first of all, I want to thank everybody for their support of this podcast. The response that we've received since releasing at the beginning of the new year has been tremendous. And we're so grateful for it. I know some of you and people I've said, well, it's a lot of information. It's like a college lecture. Indeed, there's a lot of information, but I believe very strongly that if you learn mechanism and maybe even if you hear it several times over eventually those mechanisms become embedded into the way that you view an entire topic. As well, I always try and put tools as I go along that you can look to immediately. Some of them might be right for you. Others might not, try them if you like and don't if you don't want to, and if they don't work for you, then discard them. If however, you are finding benefits from the information and from the tools and you know others that you think could benefit from it, please pass along information about the podcast. Please subscribe to the YouTube channel if you haven't already, please subscribe to us on Apple and Spotify, if you haven't already. Please leave a review in the comment section here on YouTube. Also, if you feel we deserve it please give us a five-star review on Apple. All those things really help us. In addition, if you'd like to support the podcast further we've set up a Patreon account. It's patreon.com/andrewhuberman. It allows you to support the podcast at a variety of levels. We have the 5-HTP serotonin for $5 a month, the Costello, $10 a month in honor of Costello, et cetera. You don't have to but if you'd like to, that would be terrific. In addition, please check out our sponsors that we've mentioned at the beginning of the podcast. That's one of the best ways to help support us. And we do believe in all the products that we support and our sponsors very much otherwise we wouldn't be working with them. So much so that when I mentioned supplements and I talk about supplements throughout the course of the episodes, I don't mention specific brands, but I would be remiss if I didn't mention the fact that we have partnered with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E. And we've done that because we know that Thorne uses the highest levels of stringency in terms of the products they produce. What they say is in each capsule and tablet actually is, they're used by the Mayo Clinic, by all the major sports teams because of their level of stringency and rigor. If you want to know what supplements I take you can go to thorne.com/u/huberman. And you can see the supplements that I take and you can get those as well as any of the other supplements and products that Thorne makes for 20% off. So it's thorne.com/u/huberman to get 20% off any supplements that Thorne makes. So in today's episode, we took a full journey into the brain body relationship and discussed a lot of the mechanisms and the actionable items that you can approach if you want to explore this aspect of your biology and psychology further. Last, but certainly not least, I want to thank everybody for your time and attention today, and as always, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 339 ---
Video ID: ntfcfJ28eiU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ntfcfJ28eiU
Title: Tools for Managing Stress & Anxiety
Published: 2021-03-08 13:00:12 UTC
Description:
This episode explains what stress is, and how it recruits our brain and body to react in specific ways. I describe the three main types of stress, and how two of them actually enhance the function of our immune system making us less vulnerable to infections. I review tools that allow us to control our stress in real-time, as well as tools to prevent long-term stress, burnout and stress-induced illness and anxiety. As always, we cover behavioral tools and supplements that can assist or hinder stress control.

#HubermanLab #Stress #Neuroscience

For an updated list of our current sponsors, please visit our website as previous sponsors mentioned in this podcast episode may no longer be affiliated with us: https://hubermanlab.com/sponsors

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

Timestamps below.
00:00:00 Introduction 
00:04:41 Emotions: A Logical Framework of Brain-Body Loops 
00:10:29 Stress: The (Falsely Narrow) Animal Attack Narrative 
00:14:31 The Stress RESPONSE: Generic, Channels blood, Biases Action 
00:21:08 Tools to Actually Control Stress: Reduce Alertness or Increase Calm  
00:24:15 The Fastest Way to Reduce Stress In Real Time: “Respiratory Sinus Arrhythmia”  
00:29:45 The Fastlane to Calm 
00:34:53 Important Notes About Heart Rate Deceleration: Vaso-vagal Lag 
00:36:50 Cyclic Sighing For Calm and Sleep Induction 
00:37:57 Nasal Breathing For Cosmetic, Immune and Performance Enhancement 
00:38:46 Two Breathing Centers In The Brain 
00:39:45 Breathing For Speaking Clearly  
00:40:39 The 3 Types of Stress: Short, Medium and Long-Term  
00:42:10 Positive Effects of Short-Term Stress: Immunity and Focus 
00:45:32 Adrenalin (Epinephrine) Deploys Killer Immune Cells  
00:46:40 Cyclic Deep Breathing IS Stress: Wim Hof, Tummo & Super-Oxygenation  
00:50:58 Inflammation Is Useful and Good, In the Short Term 
00:52:02 Procrastination and Self-Manufactured Nootropics 
00:53:00 Relaxation Can Causes Illness  
00:54:30 Immune Activation Protocol 
00:55:20 Medium Term Stress: A Clear Definition 
00:56:07 Stress Threshold 
00:57:10 Stress Inoculation Tools: Separating Mind & Body, On Purpose 
00:59:50 Use Vision to Calm the Mind When the Body Is Agitated 
01:02:36 Beyond NSDR 
01:04:36 Long Term Stress: Definition, Measurement, Cardiovascular Risks  
01:06:30 Tools for Dealing With Long Term Stress 
01:08:20 The Oxytocin Myth 
01:09:15 Serotonin: Satiety, Safety  
01:12:00 Delight and Flexibility  
01:13:30 Chemical Irritants We Make But Can Control: Tackykinin  
01:15:40 Impactful Gratitude  
01:16:25 Non-Prescription Chemical Compounds For Additional Anti-Stress Support  
01:18:04 Melatonin: Cautionary Note About Adrenal Suppression 
01:19:15 Adrenal Burnout Is A Myth… But Why You Need to Know About It Anyway 
01:21:10 L-Theanine For Stress Reduction and Task Completion Anxiety 
01:23:00 Beware Taurine and Energy Drinks With Taurine 
01:23:30 Ashwagandha: Can Powerfully Lower Anxiety And Cortisol  
01:25:50 Examine.com Is An Amazing Free Resource  
01:26:20 How This All Relates to Emotions: State Versus Demand = Valence 
01:32:00 Modulating Reactivity, Mindfulness, & Functionality With Objective Tools 
01:34:00 Next Steps  
01:35:40 Topic Suggestions, Subscriptions and Reviews Please 
01:37:40 Additional Resources, Synthesis

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life I'm Andrew Huberman. And I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. InsideTracker analyzes your blood and DNA to give you an accurate assessment of your health and your biological age. There are many things about our health that can only be analyzed from blood and DNA tests. I've been getting my blood assessed for many years now. And about a year ago, I switched to InsideTracker. What I like about InsideTracker is that you get all this information back about metabolic factors, endocrine factors, et cetera, that are really important to your health. But unlike a lot of blood tests where you just get all the numbers back and it tells you whether or not things are high, normal, or low, InsideTracker also has this really useful and really easy-to-use dashboard that takes the information for your blood and DNA tests and points you toward particular behavioral, nutritional, and other sorts of protocols that you can use to get the numbers where you want them for your health. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman and they will give you 25% off any of their programs. Again, their programs allow you to assess your health from the inside, things that you could just never assess from any kind of test that didn't involve blood and DNA. And it also has this really interesting feature that it can measure your inner age, which is based on biology. Your chronological age, of course, is very informative about your health and where you ought to be in terms of health metrics, but people vary. We know people, of course, that are in their late 90s who are doing well. We know people that are in their 50s who are struggling or even in their 20s. So, blood and DNA are the way to analyze your health. That's my belief. That's why I use InsideTracker. So, go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 25% off any of their products and use "Huberman" at checkout. Our second sponsor of today's episode is Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are ideally suited to your needs for the best night's sleep possible. I switched to using a Helix mattress and Helix pillow this last year and I'm sleeping better than I ever have before. The way that Helix mattresses work and the reason they're different, is that they are tailored to your individual sleep style. Your sleep style can be assessed by going to their website, you take a brief two-minute questionnaire quiz. Asks you questions like, do you sleep on your back or your side or your stomach? Maybe you don't know or maybe you move around a lot during the night. It also asks you questions such as do you tend to run hot or wake up cold, things of that sort. And then they tailor a particular mattress to your sleep needs. For me, I matched to the so-called Dusk, D-U-S-K mattress. And I love it. I sleep better than ever. And right now, if you want to try Helix Sleep you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman. And if you do that, you'll get $200 off your order plus two free pillows. They also have a great warranty. They have a 10-year warranty on their mattresses. If you don't like the mattress for any reason, they'll pick it up for free from your home. And they just make the whole thing really easy to try and determine whether or not it's right for you. So again, it's helixsleep.com/huberman to get $200 off and two free pillows on your first order. Some of you have asked how you can help support the podcast in yet other ways, besides just checking out our sponsors. We really appreciate the question and we've set up a Patreon account at patreon.com/AndrewHuberman which allows you to donate to the podcast at a variety of different levels. We have, for instance, the 5-HTP, which is in honor of a serotonin. 5-HTP is the name for serotonin that it allows you to donate $5 per month. We have the circadian, which as many of you, of course, will know is 24-hour day. So, you can donate $24 a month if you like. You can also pick any value that you want. We even have the Costello, which is $10 a month which allows you to support the podcast in honor of Costello. The fact that he's 10 years old, that he eats 10 pounds of food a day, and the fact that he takes 10 one-hour naps per day on average. So again, that's patreon.com/AndrewHuberman if you'd like to support the podcast that way. Today's episode is going to be all about the science of emotions. The first month of the podcast, we talked about sleep and wakefulness. Last month, we were talking about neuroplasticity, the brain's ability to change in response to experience. And this month we're going to talk about these things that we call emotions. We're going to decipher what they are, how they work, how we can control them when we might not want to control them. There are going to be four episodes on emotions. And today, we're going to talk in particular about something that most often is called stress. Now, you might be thinking, "Wait, stress isn't an emotion." But stress really lies at the heart of whether or not our internal experience is matched well or not to our external experience where the events that are happening to us and around us. And as you'll soon, see those converge or combine to create what we call emotions. Now, I want to be very clear that we're going to talk about the biology of emotions, we're going to talk a little bit about some psychological concepts related to emotion, and we are definitely going to talk about tools to control what we call stress or commonly think of as stress. We're also going to clean up some common myths about stress. For instance, that stress impairs your immune system. That's true in certain contexts. And in other contexts, stress actually enhances your immune system and makes it function better. There is going to be a lot of discussion about whether or not our internal state, whether or not we are alert or calm is good or bad, depending on the circumstances. So, where we're headed here is I'd like you to come away from today's episode with what I call an organizational logic, a framework for thinking about these things that typically we just call happy or sad or depressed or anxious. And I'm going to make sure that you have tools that are grounded in physiology and neuroscience that will allow you to navigate this otherwise complex space that we call emotions that will allow you to ground yourself better when you're feeling like life is weighing on you, where you're kind of being pulled by the currents of life as well as to support other people whether or not that's in a psychological practice if you're a practitioner, or you have clients or children or spouses, really, to be able to support other people in your environment better. And the tools that I'm going to focus on today range from behavioral tools. We will talk about some of the more valuable supplementation tools that are out there. And we're going to talk a little bit about things like depression, PTSD, but we will be devoting entire episodes to things like depression, PTSD, and even attention deficit and obsessive compulsive disorder, which believe it or not, although this might not surprise many of you, have a very strong emotional component. It's just not just about compulsive behaviors and intrusive thoughts. It's also about the emotional load of being in that state. So, I promise that today we're going to clean up a lot of misunderstanding. We're going to give you a lot of tools and you're going to learn a lot about the biology of how your body and brain work together. Because if ever there was a topic that brought together the brain and body or mind-body relationship, it's stress and emotions. It's also the positive emotions. When we feel something, whether or not we're super happy or just feeling kind of pleasant or we are feeling stressed, anxious, and overwhelmed, it isn't just in our head. It's also in our body. And as you may recall, the nervous system, which includes the brain and the eyes and the spinal cord, but also all the connections with the organs of the body includes the brain and body. And those organs of the body, your gut, and your liver, and your spleen, they're also communicating with the brain. So, I look forward to a day, in fact, when we no longer think about neuroscience as just the brain. And many neuroscientists now also think about the body, of course. And the brain controls the body, but the body is also having a very profound and concrete influence on the brain. I think up until recently, people would hear about kind of brain-body and always think about mindfulness. We're actually not going to talk that much about mindfulness at all today. Mindfulness is kind of a vague concept, in fact. When you think about mindfulness, it's good to take the opposite. What's the opposite of mindfulness? Would be mindlessness. Well, all of a sudden we're into territory that isn't really easy for one person to describe their experience or to help others with their experience. Today, we're going to talk about objective tools that match the brain-body experience or separate the brain-body experience in ways that leverage your ability to lean into life better, to feel better, literally to just feel better about what you're experiencing, and believe it or not, to be able to control your emotions when that's appropriate. This isn't about becoming robotic. This isn't about trying not to feel human. This is actually about being able to lean into life better as a consequence of being able to control some of your inner real estate. This nervous system that includes the brain and body and how that nervous system is interacting with the outside world. So, it's to place you in a greater position of power. And so, let's get started in deciphering what is stress, what are emotions, and why did I batch stress and emotions into one discussion today? Okay. So, what is stress? We hear all the time that stress is bad. We hear people saying they're really stressed out. What is stress? You've all presumably heard the arguments or the framework that stress is this horrible ancient carryover over from times in which humans were pursued by animals or other human predators and that whenever we feel what we call stress or feel stressed out, that it's just this unfortunate invasion of something that we no longer need in modern life, that this was designed for when we were being attacked by bears or tigers or lions or whatever it is. And gosh, what an unfortunate thing. And we have so many creature comforts nowadays, but we have not eliminated this stress. Almost as if it was like an organ or a system in our body that was bad for us, that we're stuck with just because of the species that we are. But first of all, all species experience stress. And I think that it's fair to say even though I wasn't there, that yes, in fact, throughout our evolutionary history, we were vulnerable to animal attack and other human attacks on a regular basis up until a point where we started developing weapons and structures and fire and other things that allow us to protect ourselves better from those animals and invaders of various kinds. But it is entirely naive for us to think that in ancient times, ancient times being kind of loose term for previous on medieval times, 100 years ago, 1000 years ago, 10,000 years ago, of course, there were infidelities, right? Partners cheated. People died. In fact, before the advent of phones, which we're going to talk about today, you can imagine that someone might head off on a hunt or to go visit a relative and never come back and you would never know why. That would be very stressful. So, there was psychosocial stress. There was the stress of losing loved ones. There was the stress of cold, of famine. There was the stress probably also of just worry. This idea that ancient versions of humans 1000 years ago, 100 years ago didn't worry, I think that is entirely inconsistent with everything we know about the structure of the human brain 100 years, 1000 years ago. So, all the problems that we're struggling with existed forever. It's just that stress at its core is a generalized system. It wasn't designed for tigers attacking us or people attacking us. It's a system to mobilize other systems in the brain and body. That's what stress really is. It's designed to be generic. And that's the most important thing that I'd like you to understand today, is that the system that governs what we call stress is generic. It wasn't designed for one thing. And that gives it a certain advantage in taking over the state of our brain and body, but it also gives you, all of us an advantage in controlling it because it's based on hard-wired biological mechanisms and there are hard-wired biological mechanisms, meaning cells and chemicals and pathways and tissues that exist in you right now that require no neuroplasticity that allow you to put a brake on stress. And so, we're going to talk about those. So, you have a system for stress and you have a system for distress that are baked into you. They were genetically encoded. And you were born with them and you still have them now. So, if you're alive and listening, you have the capacity to control your stress. And today, I'm going to talk about ways that you can control your stress, not just by doing some offline practice of meditation or breath work or something like that, but real-time tools. Tools that allow you to push back on stress when stress hits in real time. This is something that my lab works actively on in developing and testing these tools and evolving these tools. And there are other laboratories that do this as well. So, let's talk about the stress response. And by doing that, you will understand exactly why the tools I'm going to give you work. For those of you that are saying, "Wait, I just want the tools. Just give me a summary," trust me, if you understand mechanism, you are going to be in a far better position to incorporate these tools, to teach these tools to others, and to modify them as your life circumstances change. If you'd like the cheat sheet or you just want the one-page PDF, eventually we'll get that stuff out to people, but it's really important to understand the underlying mechanism. Okay. So, what is stress? Well, let's just distinguish between stressors, which are the things that stress us out, and stress, which is the psychological and physiological response to stressors. I'm mainly going to talk about stress, which is your response to things. Let's be clear about what we already know, which is that stressors can be psychological or they can be physical. Okay? If I put you outside on a cold day without a jacket for a very long time, that is stressful. If I have you prepare for too many exams at once and you can't balance it all with your sleep schedule and your other needs for comfort and wellbeing, like food, rest, sleep, and social connection, that is stressful. So, stress, and as I mentioned before, is generic. It doesn't distinguish between physical and emotional stress. So, what happens when the stress response hits? Let's talk about the immediate or what we call the acute stress response. We could also think of this as short-term stress. So, you have a collection of neurons. They have a name. It's called the sympathetic chain ganglia. And it has nothing to do with sympathy. Sympa means together. And there's a group of neurons that start right about at your neck and run down to about your navel, a little bit lower, and those are called the sympathetic chain ganglia. You don't need to memorize that name. There will not be a quiz. But it's important to know that in the middle of your body, you have a chain of neurons that when something stresses us out, either in our mind or because something enters our environment and we see something that stresses us out, that we don't like heights if you're afraid of heights, somebody you dislike walks into the room, et cetera, that chain of neurons becomes activated like a bunch of dominoes falling on all at once. It's very fast. When that happens, those neurons release a neuromodulator neurochemical that I've talked about before on this podcast called acetylcholine. They release that at various sites within the body. Now, this is important because normally, acetylcholine would be used to move muscles. Actually, every time we move a muscle, pick up a cup of coffee, write with a pen, walk down the street, it's spinal neurons connecting to muscle and releasing acetylcholine. So, in the brain it's involved in focus and it muscles is involved in making muscles twitch. But if we were stressed, we wouldn't want all our muscles to contract at once because we would just be kind of like paralyzed like this in what tonic activation, as it's called. We wouldn't want that. Something called tetanus, believe it or not. because the tetanus toxin will cause that kind of rigor of the entire body. You do not want that. When those neurons are activated, acetylcholine is released, but there are some other neurons for the aficionados out there. They're called the postganglionic neurons. Those ones respond to that acetylcholine and then they release epinephrine, which is the equivalent to adrenaline. So, we have this system where it's very fast whenever we're stressed, the core of our body, these neurons down the middle of our body release these chemicals and then there's adrenaline or epinephrine released at particular organs and acts in particular ways. We're going down into the weeds here. So just stay with me because it's going to make a lot of sense and you will appreciate having this knowledge in hand. That epinephrine acts in two different ways. Some things like the muscles of your legs and your heart and other things that need to be active when you're stressed, they have a certain kind of receptor which is called the beta receptor. And that beta receptor responds to epinephrine and blood vessels dilate. They get bigger and blood rushes in to our legs. The heart rate speeds up. Lots of things happen that get activated. And at the same time, that epinephrine activates other receptors on certain tissues that we don't need. The ones involved in digestion, reproduction, and things of that sort that are luxuries for when things are going well, not things to pay attention to when we're stressed. And that binds to other receptors that contract the blood vessels. So, basically the stress response, this is the key phrase here, the stress response A, is generic, I said that before, and B, it basically pushes certain systems to be activated and other systems to not be activated. So, the stress response is two-pronged. It's a yes for certain things and it's a no, you may not right now for other things. So, that's the key thing to understand about the stress response. That's why your heart speeds up. That's why you feel blood in certain organs and tissues of your body, but not in others. That's why your throat goes dry because it turns out that when you get stressed, the salivary glands are shut down. There's a lot less blood flow to the neurons that control salivation. And so, you're going to start swallowing. You feel like your throat is getting dry. There are a lot of different effects. I'm not going to list them all off, but basically, you are activated in ways that support you moving. So, that's the third thing. It's first of all, it's generic. Second of all, the stress response, activate certain things and shuts down other features of our body. And then it's a sense of agitation that makes you want to move. And that's because fundamentally, the stress response is just this generic thing that says do something. And movement in this case can either be the bias to move in terms of action, or it can be the bias to say something. When we are stressed, we are more likely to say something that probably we shouldn't say. We are more likely to move. And if you're trying to suppress movement, you'll feel that as a tremor. You're going to feel agitated and that's because it was designed to move you. So, this is important because if you want to control stress, you need to learn how to work with that agitation. I'd like to give you a tool at this point, because I think if we go any further with a lot more science, people are going to begin to wonder if this is just going to be a kind of standard university lecture about the stress response. I'm going to give you more signs about the stress response, but I want to take what we now already know about the stress response and use that as a framework for thinking about how one might reduce or even eliminate the stress response quickly in real time, should it arise when we don't want it. So, we're taking the podium or we're sitting down at a Zoom call, and all of a sudden we're feeling flushed. We're feeling like our heart is racing. We're feeling a little too alert. We're feeling a little worked up and we want to calm down. As far as I am aware of, the best tools to reduce stress quickly, so-called real-time tools are going to be tools that have a direct line to the so-called autonomic nervous system. The autonomic nervous system is a name given to the kind of general features of alertness or calmness in the body. Typically, it means automatic. Although we do have some control over it at certain what so-called leavers are entry points. Here's what doesn't work to control stress. Telling yourself to calm down. In fact, that tends to just exacerbate stress. Telling someone else to calm down also tends to exacerbate their stress. If you want to reduce the magnitude of the stress response, the best thing you can do is activate the other system in the body which is designed for calming and relaxation. And that system is called the parasympathetic nervous system. Because as I mentioned before, the neurons that control stress run from about your neck to your navel. The parasympathetic neurons, para just means near, exist in, they're some of the cranial nerves. So, it's kind of left neck and lower brainstem. Kind of back of the brain and in the neck and in the pelvic area. And the parasympathetic nervous system is really interesting because especially the cranial nerves, the ones that are up in the brainstem and in the neck area, those have a direct line to various features of your face, in particular, the eyes. They control things like eye movements, pupil dilation, things of that sort, as well as the tongue, the facial muscles, et cetera. The parasympathetic nervous system, many people don't realize this, is the system by which we control the face and the eyes, and to some extent, our airway, the trachea. And it's these neurons that reside within the pelvic area. Now, the neurons within the pelvic area are involved in control of the genitals, the bladder, and the rectum. And those don't have a direct line. You don't have a direct way to control those. It actually has to go from brain to spinal cord and then out to those organs. Whereas the parasympathetic nervous system has certain entry points or what I'll call leavers that will allow you to push back on the stress response in real time and diminish it and feel more relaxed really quickly. So, I'm going to teach you the first tool now, so I don't overwhelm you with all this academic knowledge without giving you something useful. And the tool that at least to my knowledge is the fastest and most thoroughly grounded in physiology and neuroscience for calming down in a self-directed way is what's called the physiological sigh, S-I-G-H. Now, some of you might've heard me talk about this on previous podcasts, but I'm going to explain this in the context of how respiration in general is used to calm us down. And turns out you're all doing this all the time, but you are doing it involuntarily. And when you stress, you tend to forget that you can also activate these systems voluntarily. This is an extremely powerful set of techniques that we know from scientific studies that are being done in my lab, Jack Feldman's lab at UCLA, and others now that are very, very useful for reducing your stress response in real time. And here's how they work. These days, there seems to be a lot of interest in breath work. Breath work typically, is when you go and you sit down or you lie down and you deliberately breathe in a particular way for a series of minutes in order to shift your physiology, access some states. And it does have some utility that we're going to talk about, that is not what I'm talking about now. What I'm talking about when I refer to physiological sighs, is the very real medical school textbook relationship between the brain, the body, and the body as it relates to the breathing apparati, meaning the diaphragm and lungs and the heart. Let's take the hallmark of the stress response. The heart starts beating faster. Blood is shuttled to the big muscles of the body to move you away from whatever it is the stressor is or just make you feel like you need to move or talk. Your face goes flushed, et cetera. Heart rate, many of us feel is involuntary. Just kind of functions whether or not we're moving fast or moving slow. If you think about it, it's not really purely autonomic because you can speed up your heart rate by running or you can slow it down by slowing down your run. You can move to a walk or lie down. But that's indirect control. There is however, a way in which you can breathe that directly controls your heart rate through the interactions between the sympathetic and the parasympathetic nervous system. Here's how it works. When you inhale, so whether or not it's through the nose or through the mouth, this skeletal muscle that's inside your body called the diaphragm, it moves down. And that's because the lungs expand, the diaphragm moves down. Your heart actually gets a little bit bigger in that expanded space. There's more space for the heart. So, not your emotional heart getting bigger. I'm talking about your actual physical heart getting a little bit bigger. The volume grows. And as a consequence, whatever blood is in there is now at a lower volume or moving a little bit more slowly in that larger volume than it was before you inhaled. Okay? So more space, heart gets bigger. Blood moves more slowly. And there's a little group of neurons called the sinoatrial node in the heart that registers, believe it or not, those neurons pay attention to the rate of blood flow through the heart and send a signal up to the brain that blood is moving more slowly through the heart. The brain then sends a signal back to the heart to speed the heart up. So, what this means is if you want your heart to beat faster, inhale longer, inhale more vigorously than your exhales. Now, there are a variety of ways that one could do that, but it doesn't matter if it's through the nose or through the mouth. If your inhales are longer than your exhales, you're speeding up your heart. If your inhales are more vigorous, so even if your inhales are shorter than your exhales, you are speeding up your heart rate. Now, the opposite is also true. If you want to slow your heart rate down, so stress response hits, you want to slow your heart rate down, what you want to do is again, capitalize on this relationship between the body, meaning the diaphragm and the heart and the brain. Here's how it works. When you exhale, the diaphragm moves up, which makes the heart a little bit smaller. It actually gets a little more compact. Blood flows more quickly through that compact space sort of like just a pipe getting smaller. The sinoatrial node registers that blood is going more quickly, sends a signal up to the brain. And the parasympathetic nervous system, some neurons in your brain stem send a signal back to the heart to slow the heart down. So, if you want to calm down quickly, you need to make your exhales longer and or more vigorous than your inhales. Now, the reason this is so attractive as a tool for controlling stress is that it works in real time. This doesn't involve a practice that you have to go and sit there and do anything separate from life. And we are going to get to emotion. Emotions and stress happen in real time. And so, while it's wonderful to have a breath work practice or to have the opportunity to get a massage or sit in a sauna or do whatever it is that you do in order to set your stress controls in the right direction, having tools that you can reach to in real time that require no learning, I mean, I had to teach it to you, you had to learn that, but it doesn't require any plasticy to activate these pathways. So, if you're feeling stressed, you still need to inhale, of course, but you need to lengthen your exhales. Now, there's a tool that capitalizes on this in a kind of unique way, a kind of a twist, which is the physiological sigh. The physiological sigh was discovered in the '30s. It's now been explored at the neuro-biological level and mechanistically in far more detail by Jack Feldman's lab at UCLA. Also Mark Krasnow's lab at Stanford. And the physiological sigh is something that humans and animals do anytime they are about to fall asleep. You also do it throughout sleep from time to time when carbon dioxide, which we'll talk about in a moment, builds up too much in your system. And the physiological sigh is something that people naturally start doing when they've been crying and they're trying to recover some air or calm down when they've been sobbing very hard or when they are in claustrophobic environments. However, the amazing thing about this thing that we call the diaphragm, the skeletal muscle, is that it's an internal organ that you can control voluntarily, unlike your spleen or your heart or your pancreas where you can't just say, "Oh, I want to make my pancreas turn out a little more insulin right now. I'm just going to do that with my mind directly." You can't do that. You can do that by smelling a really good donut or something, but you can't just do it directly. You can move your diaphragm intentionally, right? You can do it anytime you want. And it'll run in the background if you're not thinking about it. So, this incredible pathway that goes from brain to diaphragm through what's called the phrenic nerve, P-H-R-E-N-I-C. Phrenic. The phrenic nerve innervates the diaphragm. You can control anytime you want. You can double up your inhales or triple up your inhales. You can exhale more than your inhales. Whatever you want to do. Such an incredible organ. And the physiological sigh is something that we do spontaneously. But when you're feeling stressed, you can do a double inhale, [inhales deeply] [exhales] long exhale. Now, I just told you a minute ago that if you inhale more than you exhale, you're going to speed the heart rate up, which would promote more stress and activation. Now I'm telling you to do a double inhale-exhale in order to calm down. And the reason is the double inhale-exhale which is the physiological sigh takes advantage of the fact that when we do a double inhale, even if the second inhale is sneaking in just a tiny bit more air, because it's kind of hard to get to deep inhales back to back, you do big deep inhale and then another little ones sneaking it in, the little sacks in your lungs. If you only have the lungs. Your lungs are just two big bags, but you've got millions of little sacks throughout the lungs that actually make the surface area of your lungs as big as a tennis court. It's amazing if we were to just spread out. Those tend to collapse as we get stressed. And carbon dioxide builds up in our bloodstream and that's one of the reasons we feel agitated as well. So, and it makes us very jittery. I mean, there's some other effects of carbon dioxide I don't want to get into, but when you do the double inhale-exhale, the double inhale reinflates those little sacks of the lungs. And then when you do the long exhale, that long exhale is now much more effective at reading your body and bloodstream of carbon dioxide, which relaxes you very quickly. My lab in collaboration with David Spiegel's lab, David's the Associate Chair of Psychiatry at Stanford, are doing a study right now exploring how physiological sighs and other patterns of breathing done deliberately can modulate the stress response and other things related to emotionality. Those work are ongoing. I want to be clear those studies aren't done. But it's very clear from work in our labs, from work in Jack Feldman's lab and others, that the physiological sigh is the fastest, hardwired way for us to eliminate this stressful response in our body quickly in real time. And so, I'm excited to give you this tool because I think most people have heard that mindfulness and meditation is good, exercise is good for us, we all need to be getting enough sleep, et cetera, but life happens. And when you find yourself in a position where you are more alert and activated than you would like to be, regardless of whether or not the stressor is relationship-based or it's financial or it's physical or anything like that, you can look to the physiological sigh because it bypasses a very important feature of how we function, which is that it's very hard to control the mind with the mind, especially when we are in heightened states of activation. When you're very alert or very sleepy, it is very hard to use these so-called top-down mechanisms of intention and gratitude and all these things that are really powerful tools when we are not super activated and stressed or not super tired. But when we are anywhere in the range of very alert and stressed to very sleepy, physiological sighs are a powerful way of bringing our level of so-called autonomic activation, which just means our level of alertness down. And so, whether or not it's in line at the bank or whether or not you're wearing a mask nowadays or you're not, whatever the conditions may be where you're at and your needs, when you're feeling stressed, the physiological sigh done just one to three times, it will be double inhale, exhale, double inhale, exhale maybe just two times will bring down your level of stress very, very fast. And as far as I know, it's the fastest way to accomplish that. An important note about the physiological sigh or exhale-emphasized breathing for lowering the stress response. Many people worry that their heart rate does not come down fast enough. I want to tell you you do not want your heart rate to reduce very fast. There's actually something called the vasovagal response, where people will stand up or they'll get up in the middle of the night to use the bathroom and then all of a sudden, they'll collapse, they'll faint. That's because the heart rate was reduced too much. Some people will see blood or they'll see something really troubling and stressful and they'll pass out. That's an over-activation or an acceleration of the calming response. They're not so stressed that they kind of fall off the cliff of stress. They get so stressed that the rebound mechanism for calming themselves down goes too high, too fast. They calmed down too fast and they collapse and faint. And so, be aware that if you're going to use the physiological sigh or exhale-emphasized breathing to calm down, that your heart rate will take about 20 to 30 seconds to come down to baseline. And you may need to repeat the physiological sigh a few times. So, that's an important note about the use of breathing to control levels of stress. The other thing is that when you decide to look to the body to control the mind, it does something else that's very powerful. When you are stressed in your mind and body, so you're feeling really agitated, activated, and worried, and you use a tool like the physiological sigh or exhale-emphasized breathing, you will notice that then your brain and your mind becomes more available for controlling the stress response and reacting to it. Which is great because the sweet spot in life is to be, provided you're not trying to sleep, is to be alert and calm. And so, that's the idea. Is to be alert and calm and to bring you back into that sort of plane of alertness. For those of you that have trouble sleeping or just relaxing through the day, the physiological sigh can be repeated for 10, 15 cycles if you like. Some people find that it actually puts them to sleep. So, if they lie down and they're reading and they do too many of these, that actually can put them to sleep. And what you'll find is that most breath work protocols, the kind of stuff that's done away from real life, that you set aside time and decide to do quote unquote, breath work, most of that works such that if you're doing inhales that are longer and more vigorous than exhales, it tends to be activating and alert you. If you're doing exhales that are longer and more vigorous than the inhales, it tends to put you to sleep. And many of the protocols that are out there from laboratories and that populate the internet and wellness sites and whatnot, if it's exhale-emphasized breathing, oftentimes has been used as a tool for trying to teach people to fall asleep. Physiological sigh is a little different. It's designed to be used in real time. Just think of it is just kind of in your kit of things that you can do as life happens and as you need to react to life. A note about nasal versus mouth breathing, there's a plethora of information out there now because of James Nestor's book, "Breath: The New Science of a Lost Art," which came out this last year. Excellent book. As well as "Jaws" which is from Sandra Kahn, Paul Ehrlich with a foreword by Jared Diamond and Robert Sapolsky. So, a collection of people from Stanford. Jared Diamond is not at Stanford, but the rest are. And some heavy hitters on that book, which is about the benefits of nasal breathing. And in many cases, nasal breathing is more advantageous than mouth breathing for all sorts of things. Cosmetic features of the face, especially in kids, warding off infection, et cetera. With the physiological sigh, the best way to do it would be double inhale through the nose, exhale through the mouth. But if you can't, and you can only do that through your mouth, just do it through your mouth. If want to do all through your nose, do it through your nose. This anchors back to some underlying neurology or neuroscience. So, for those of you that want to know, you have two breathing centers. One that's involved in rhythmic breathing for inhales followed by exhales, followed by inhales followed by exhales. The so-called pre-Botzinger nucleus named after a bottle of wine and discovered by Jack Feldman at UCLA and a nearby nucleus called the parafacial nucleus also discovered by Jack Feldman at UCLA. And the parafacial nucleus is involved in any time you double up the inhales or double up the exhales. It was designed so that you could breathe while you're speaking because you can't always go inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale when you're speaking. So, I tell you this, not to overwhelm you with knowledge, but just know that when you double up your inhales or you double up your exhales, you are activating this parafacial nucleus. And it has other cool effects. Because it's located near the neurons that control the face, it also has a tendency to relax the jaw. There's some interplay between the neurons that control the speaking stuff and the stuff for your tongue. So, all of a sudden, when we do this physiological sigh, we tap into neural circuitry that allows us to speak more clearly, to control the muscles of the face and jaw. Maybe that means not saying certain things when we're stressed, and just generally to relax. And so, this brings us back to the neuroscience of this parasympathetic nervous system. This calming system that's been genetically encoded into us that we all have, regardless of who our parents are, which is that the neurons that control all this stuff, the face, the eyes, et cetera, are all working together. And that's why when we get stressed, it's hard for us to speak or we tend to jitter and these kinds of things. Just like all the neurons that cause stress in the center of the spinal cord are working together to get our body activated. Okay, lot of science today. You've now got the physiological sigh as a tool. You know the exhale-emphasized breathing will slow your heart down and inhale-emphasized breathing will speed your heart up. So, let's think about something now. Let's think about stress from not whether or not it's acute or chronic, whether or not it's good for us or bad for us, but on three different timescales. Because then we can arrive at what this is all about as it relates to emotions. Because trust me, this has everything to do with emotions and whether or not you're functioning well emotionally or you're not functioning well emotionally, whether or not you're coping or not coping. So, those are typically psychological terms and psychological discussions. We are entering this through the portal of physiology. The stuff of medical textbooks. And we will arrive at the psychology soon, but I really want you to understand the difference between the three kinds of stress on three different timescales, short-term, medium-term, and long-term, and what it's good for and what it's bad for. I think we've all heard that stress is bad for us. We've seen these pictures intended to frighten us. And indeed they are frightening. You see the nice really plump brain on the left. It says healthy or control. And then you see the brain that says stressed above it on the right and it's like withered, where we see that the hippocampus and area involved in memory is smaller. People that are stressed. We see that the Alzheimer's brain is made worse by stress. That people who have a predisposition to schizophrenia, when they get stressed, higher incidence of schizophrenia episodes. You hear that addicts will relapse when they're stressed. I mean, okay, we get it. And it's very important, but I think we've all heard now so many times that stress is bad. But in that conversation, unfortunately, it's eclipsed some of the really positive things that stress does for us in the short-term. So, stress can be short-term, medium-term, or long-term. Long-term stress is indeed bad for all the reasons I just mentioned and many others. But what's never actually been discussed is what stress is so terrific for, positive for in the short-term. And I think we tend to overlook the important question, which is what is short-term and what is long-term? No one ever bothers to tell us what is chronic, what is acute. Right? Is it five minutes? Is it five days? Is it for the duration of final exams? Or is it for the duration of a senior thesis in college? No one actually draws boundaries around this stuff or even general guidelines. And so, it's become a bit of a mess, frankly, to try and decipher this whole space around stress. So, I'm going to try and clean some of this up for you based on what we know from the scientific data. First of all, acute stress, when the stress response hits, that is good for your immune system. I know that might be a tough pill to swallow, but it's absolutely true. In fact, stress often comes in the form of bacterial or viral infection. And the stress response is in part organized to combat bacterial and viral infection. There are pathways from the same brain centers that activate these neurons in your spinal cord to make you feel like you want to move. There are other neurons in your brain that activate things like your spleen, which will deploy killer cells to go out and scavenge for incoming bacteria and viruses and try and eat them up and kill them. So, short-term stress and the release of adrenaline in particular or epinephrine, same thing, adrenaline and epinephrine, is good for combating infection. And this to me is just not discussed enough. So, that's why I'm discussing it here. And it relates to a particular tool that many of you ask about, but I don't often get the opportunity to talk about in such an appropriate context. It's not that it's ever inappropriate to talk about, but what I'm about to talk about now is the use of, again, respiration breathing to somewhat artificially activate the stress response. And that will accomplish two things. Okay? I'll return to medium and long-term stress, but I want to say short-term stress is good because the dilation of the pupils, the changes in the optics of the eyes, the quickening of the heart rate, the sharpening of your cognition. And in fact that short-term stress brings certain elements of the brain online that allow you to focus. Now, it narrows your focus. You're not good at seeing the so-called big picture, but it narrows your focus. It allows you to do these, what I call duration path outcome types of analysis. It allows you to evaluate your environment, evaluate what you need to do. It primes your whole system for better cognition. It primes your immune system to combat infection. And that all makes sense when you think about that the fact that famine, thirst, bacterial infections, viral infections, invaders, all of this stuff liberates a response in the body that's designed to get you to fight back against whatever stressor that happens to be. Psychological, physical, bacterial, viral. Again, the stress response is generic. The tool takes advantage of the fact that when adrenaline is released in the body from the adrenals, it has the effect of also liberating a lot of these killer cells from the immune organs, in particular from the spleen, but from elsewhere as well, and interactions with the lymphatic system that combat infection. The way this works in the real world is best captured by a study that can be mapped back to so-called Wim Hof breathing. Now, Wim Hof breathing is so named after the so-called "Iceman," Wim Hof. Wim Hof, of course, being this Dutch. He, I think he has self-titled Daredevil. And indeed he has many, many Guinness Book of World Records for things like swimming under icebergs and going up Kilimanjaro in his shorts and crossing the desert without water, et cetera. Things that are quite dangerous if you don't know what you're doing. And Wim obviously survived or I'm telling you he survived. But there are two components to a sort of breathing protocol that he developed that was based also on what's called Tummo breathing, T-U-M-M-O. So, before Wim, there was Tummo breathing. And many people call this now super oxygenation breathing. Although the breath work aficionados will probably say, well, it's not super oxygenation because you're also blowing an awful lot of carbon dioxide. What I'm talking about here, regardless of whether or not it's called Wim Hof, Tummo, or super oxygenation, is rapid deliberate breathing. So, it's deliberate hyperventilation. Why would somebody want to do this? Well, deliberate hyperventilation done for maybe 25 cycles. So inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale. Typically, it's done in through the nose out through the mouth. Although sometimes it's just through the mouth. If you do that for 15 breaths, 20 breaths, 25 breaths, you will feel very alert. People who have anxiety will feel anxious. They might even have an anxiety attack. However, we need to ask why that kind of breathing feels that way. And it's because that pattern of breathing, rapid movements of the diaphragm will liberate adrenaline from the adrenals. So, it's the release of adrenaline. I mentioned that Wim is also called "The Iceman." Well, that's because he actually discovered this pattern of breathing, somewhat. And again, it maps back to Tummo breathing by going into cold water. When you go into cold water, that too is a stressor and you liberate adrenaline in response to cold water. So, if you get into an ice bath or a cold shower, you will immediately release adrenaline from your adrenals. Now, there are all sorts of things related to this about psychological control and stress thresholds that we'll talk about, but I really want people to understand that when adrenaline is released in the body, you are in a better position to combat infections. And so, whether or not you breathe very quickly in these cycles of 25 breaths and regardless of what you call it, doesn't matter, adrenaline is released. If you take a cold shower, adrenaline is released. If you go into an ice bath deliberately, and even if you do it non-deliberately, adrenaline is released. You are mimicking the stress response. And that adrenaline serves to suppress or combat incoming infections. And this was beautifully shown in a study that was published in a very fine journal, the "Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences for the US." It's literally called "Proceedings of the National Academy of USA" to distinguish it from other proceedings of other national academies in other countries. The way the experiment went is that people were injected with endotoxin or in some cases they were injected with a bacterial wall that mimics infection. It gives you a fever. It makes you feel nauseous. It makes you feel sick. It is not pleasant. Half of the people did a particular pattern of breathing that looked very much like the pattern of breathing I described a moment ago of doing 25 deep inhales and exhales followed by an exhale holding their breath. Then repeating 25 inhales, exhales holding their breath. So, this would look something like this, or if you're listening, it sounds like [inhaling and exhaling]. 25, 30 times, you'll start feeling heated up. You'll start feeling the adrenaline response. You're liberating adrenaline in your body. Then exhale, hold your breath for 15 seconds and then repeat. And then typically, after doing three or four rounds of that, they would inhale very deeply and hold their breath. Now, I want to emphasize never ever, ever do this anywhere near water. People have passed out. So-called shallow water blackout. People have died. Don't do it in the bathtub. Don't do it the hot tub. Don't do it before swimming. Please don't do it anywhere near water. Please don't do it at all, unless you get clearance to do it from your doctor because there are some pulmonary effects and whatnot. And the breath holds should definitely not be done by anyone that has glaucoma pressure concerns for the eyes. But these repeated cycles of breathing that liberate adrenaline allowed the group that did that protocol to essentially experience zero symptoms from the ejection of this E. coli, which is remarkable. They had much reduced or no symptoms. They didn't feel feverish. They didn't feel sick. They weren't vomiting, no diarrhea, which is remarkable, but makes total sense when you think about the fact that the short-term stress response there, what's typically called the acute stress response, it's designed to combat all stressors. In fact, were you to cut yourself very deeply while out on a hike in the woods, the other thing that would happen is that there would be a rapid inflammation response. And we always hear inflammation is bad. Inflammation gives us Alzheimer's. Inflammation is the worst thing. But the swelling is associated, the inflammation is associated with the recruitment of things like macrophages or microglia if it's a neural tissue. Cells in our brain and body whose job is to act like little ambulances and rush to that site and clean it up. And indeed the inflammation response looks horrible, it sounds horrible, but it's a great thing in the short-term. You want to have that tissue marked as in trouble and you want the body and brain to react to it. So, if you're getting peaks in stress from time to time throughout your day or throughout your week, you are in a better position to combat infection. You are any better position to heal your wounds, physical wounds. Many great things happen in the stress response. Now, of course, the stress response isn't always super intense. Sometimes it's milder. Sometimes it allows us to just focus on something because we have a deadline. That can feel stressful, but that's one of the reasons you procrastinators out there, people are always asking me what can be done for procrastination? What can be done for procrastination is you can understand what's happening, which is that you are self-imposing stress because stress acts like a drug. It is a powerful nootropic. I get asked about nootropics. The most powerful nootropic or smart drug is stress. It's the concern of failure. It's the desire to do well. It's the impending deadline. It's the, "Oh my gosh, I have to do this thing now or I'm going to fail." That is the best nootropic you will ever find. That combined with a good night's sleep, which we'll talk about. But we spent a whole month on sleep. So, I don't want to backtrack too much. Okay. So, short-term stress, great. The key is to be able to turn the stress response off when you're done, when you don't want that. In fact, let's just really tamp down the relationship between the short-term or acute stress response and infection. Many of us are familiar with the experience of work, work, work, work, work, or taking care of a loved one, or stress, stress, stress, stress, then we finally relax. Maybe we even go on vacation. Like, "Oh, now I'm finally going to get the break." And then we get sick. And that's because the adrenaline response crashed and your immune system crashed with it. So, please understand this. Now, many of you might say, "Well, how long? Is it two hours? Is it three hours?" A lot of you out there that really like specificity, it will vary for everybody. I would just kind of use a rule of thumb. When you are no longer able to achieve good sleep, what good sleep means to you, and please see the episodes on sleep if you want more about tools to sleep, when you are no longer able to achieve good sleep, you are now moving from acute stress to chronic stress. You need to be able to turn the stress response off. If I have one wish, well, I have many wishes for this lifetime, but if I have one wish today that I hope will permeate and spread out there, is this idea that we need from a young age, but even as adults and forever, we need to learn how to turn off our stress response. Physiological sigh is one. If we're going to activate our stress response intentionally by ice baths, cold showers, cyclic hyperoxygenated breathing, aka Tummo breathing or Wim Hof breathing, we also need to learn how to press the brake. Okay? So, let's think about the stress system. It knows how to activate itself. Now we're talking about a way of deliberately activating your stress system in order to combat infection. I do this from time to time. I might feel a tickle in my throat or like I'm getting kind of run down, I will do this kind of breathing. I do. I will take 25 or 30 breaths. Exhale, hold my breath. 25, 30 breaths again, exhale, hold my breath for about 15 seconds. 25, 30 breaths again, exhale, hold my breath for 25 or 30 seconds. Then a big inhale. And I hold my breath until I feel the impulse to breathe. Again, I feel it's safe for me. I've run it by my doctor, so it's fine. You should not do this unless it's right for you. But I do this. Some people like the ice bath. I rarely do the ice bath. Some people like cold showers. I like hot showers. So, I take hot showers, but I do this kind of breathing. Again, they are all having more or less the same effect of increasing adrenaline, which allows you to combat the infection because you're activating the immune response. Okay. So, now let's talk about medium-term stress. Medium-term stress is going to be stress that lasts anywhere from several days to several weeks. Okay. We might think of that as long-term stress. There are times in life when we are just dealing with a lot. Okay? This particular quarter, I happened to be directing a course, I'm doing the lab, I'm doing this. I enjoy all these things immensely, but I'm kind of near my threshold. I'm near the point where any additional thing, like I couldn't log onto a website the other day and it felt like the most intense thing in the world at that moment. And I kind of laughed at myself. Fortunately, I caught it. But that typically wouldn't be my response under conditions where I wasn't pushed to threshold. What is this medium-term stress? What is stress threshold? Well, stress threshold is actually our ability to cognitive re-regulate what's going on in our body. So, we all hear so much about we need to unify our mind and body. We need to be at one with our mind and body or whatever. Now I realize I'm kind of poking fun at some of the new agey language, but the reason I poke fun is not because I don't think it has value, but it has no specificity. What does that mean? I mean, I think I'm always in my body. I've never fortunately looked across the room and seen my arm over there or my leg over there. I'm connected to my body. There actually is a syndrome where people feel disconnected from their limbs. This is a real clinical condition. These people actually will seek out amputation. They will try and convince doctors to amputate certain portions of their body. It's a really terrible thing for people to have. And it relates to a change in central maps in the brain, believe it or not. Most of us want to keep our limbs, whichever ones we happen to have. And most of us feel one in mind and body so much so that when stress hits, we feel it in our mind and body. A lot of stress inoculation, a lot of managing medium-term stress on the timescale of weeks or maybe even a couple months, so we're not talking about years of stress, a lot of that has to do with raising our stress threshold. It's about capacity. And there are very simple tools, excellent tools that will allow us to modulate our capacity for stress. And they look a lot like the tools I just described. They involve placing oneself deliberately into a situation where our adrenaline is increased somewhat not to the extreme. And then when we feel flooded with adrenaline, and normally we would panic, it's about cognitively, mentally, emotionally calming ourselves and being comfortable with that response in our body. So, unlike trying to unify the mind and body and make it all calm or make it all alert, this is about dissociating mind and body in a healthy way. And what would this look like? Well, this is something I actually do as a practice because I mentioned before, you can use physiological sighs in real time, you can use the cyclic hyperoxygenation breathing to combat infection if you're feeling kind of run down. And there's also a way in which you can use things like cold showers, or if you exercise and you bring your heart rate up very high, you kind of go into that high-intensity realm where your heart is beating a little bit harder than you're comfortable with and that you're just you feel, some people think it's lactic acid. No one can agree on this what the burn is, whether or not it's lactic acids or it's buildup of hydrogen or whatever. I don't want to get into that, but we're all familiar with the intense feeling of your muscles kind of burning because you're working very hard physically. The key in those moments is to learn to relax the mind while the body is very activated. And what that tends to do, there's a limited amount of research on this, but what that tends to do is it tends to create a situation where what once felt like a lot feels manageable. Okay? That you've raised your stress threshold or your stress capacity. One way that you can do this, and this is kind of fun, if it's approved by your physician and you're able to do this, you can bring your heart rate up. You can do this through an ice bath if that's your thing or a cold shower or cyclic oxygenation breathing or you could sprint or you could go hard on the bike, whenever it is that brings your heart rate up. And then what you want to do is you want to actually try and calm the mind while your body is in this heightened state of activation. And the best way that I'm aware to do that, again goes back to physiology, not psychology. When we are stressed, our pupils dilate. The effect of that pupil dilation is to create tunnel vision. It literally narrows our view of the visual world. We no longer see in Panorama. And there's some other effects as well. But that's because the visual system through this cranial nerve system that I described before is tethered and is part of this autonomic nervous system. By deliberately dilating your gaze, meaning not moving your head and eyes around, but by deliberately going from tunnel vision to broader panoramic vision, literally seeing more of your environment all at once. You don't have to do what I'm doing, which is not blinking. You're welcome to blink. But it means deliberately dilating your gaze so that you can see yourself in the environment you're in. It creates a calming effect on the mind because it releases a particular circuit in the brainstem that's associated with alertness, aka stress. Now, this is very powerful. If you're running, for instance, and you're at max capacity or close to it, or you're kind of hitting like 80, 90% of maximum on the bike and you dilate your gaze, what you'll find is the mind can relax while the body is in full output. And this relates to work that in various communities, people are working with this in the sports community, military community, et cetera. But it's a form, not really of stress inoculation, it's more about raising stress threshold so that the body is going to continue to be in a high alertness, high reactivity mode, high output, but the mind is calm. And so, this isn't about unifying mind and body. This is actually about using body to bring up your level of activation, then dissociating, not the clinical dissociation kind of disorders, but dissociating the mental or emotional response from what's going on in your body. And over time, so if you do this a couple of times, you don't have to do this every workout, but if you do this every maybe once a week or so, you start being comfortable at these higher activation states. What once felt overwhelming and like a lot of work, now is manageable. It feels tolerable. So, that's for navigating medium-term stress. Now, there are other tools as well, but we don't want to go over 90 minutes because 90 minutes is one old trading cycle. I was trying to keep these podcasts to one on trading cycle, in case you haven't noticed, so you can derive maximum benefit from them based on all trading and cycle principles of learning. So, I don't want to go into every little bit of this. And I want to make sure we get to emotions. But I want to emphasize that these medium-term stressors, of, "Oh, it's been a hard month, or hard week." Stanford's on the quarter system. So 10 weeks or semester. That becomes more manageable when we train ourselves to be calm of mind when our body is activated. And if you haven't noticed, most of the tools I'm describing today are nothing like the sort of, okay, sit and do meditation. I'm actively avoiding saying the words NSDR, non-sleep deep rest. I talked a lot about those tools during the months on sleep and neuroplasticity. And of course, they are wonderful for replenishing your ability to lean into effort, to learn to focus. Please do try and check out NSDR protocol. See if they're right for you. The margins for safety, I think are enormous. You're basically just listening to a script. We have links to them in previous captions. I've talked on them on various podcasts before. We can provide them again. But today I'm really talking about tools, so you can learn to dance with stress. To in the short-term, reduce that stress response a little bit if you feel it's too uncomfortable. In the medium-term, to be comfortable with these heightened levels of activation because life is going to continue to come at you. And we can't pick the stressors, but we need to be able to function at a higher capacity often. And then there's long-term stress. Now, long-term stress is bad. You do not want adrenaline up in your system for a very long time. In fact, you ideally, you would have your stress go up various times throughout the day, but it would never stay elevated and it would never prevent you from getting a good night's sleep. Now, that isn't realistic. Okay? I would say for me, three, four nights out of the month, no matter what I do, I take on too much or something happens in life is life and I don't get the best night's sleep that I would like to get. For many of you, it's 30 nights per month. For some of you, it's zero nights per month. And congratulations to you zero nights per month people. If you are managing your sleep really well every night, that is fantastic. You really want to be able to fall asleep at night, stay asleep for most of the night. And if you get up, go back to sleep for as long as you need to in order to feel rested. That's what I define as a healthy relationship to sleep. Check out the episodes on sleep if you want tools to be able to accomplish that. And we can all accomplish that. It can be done. And there are tools to do it. Zero-cost tools. Okay, so let's talk about long-term stress. Earlier, I talked about how breathing can modulate heart rate through this loop that includes the brain and the parasympathetic nervous system. I don't think I mentioned this, and I want to make sure that I mentioned that breathing controlling heart rate through the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system is the basis of what's called HRV, heart rate variability. And we know that heart rate variability is good. You don't want your heart rate chronically elevated or chronically low. A lot of people think, "Oh, I want a really nice low heart rate." And indeed, if you're in shape, the stroke volume of your heart will be greater and you can have a nice slow heart rate. Years ago when I was running regularly, I think my heart rate was down to like 50 or 60 or something like that. That's great. But, and now it's higher than that because I'm running a little bit less. But everyone needs to determine what's right for them. But you don't really want your heart rate to be chronically low or chronically high. Both are bad. We know that chronic stress, elevated stress and especially in the so-called type A personalities creates heart disease, the leading killer of for in most, every country, but in particular in the US. Because of the way that adrenaline impacts those blood vessels or constricting some and dilating others, it's just that kind of hypertension, chronic hypertension is just bad. And so, chronic stress truly is bad. I want to really make that clear because I emphasized a lot of what some of the positive effects of stress. But you want to be able to tamp down your stress in real time. You also want to be able to modulate your stress and your emotional relationship to stress in the body in the medium-term, but by no means do you want to be stressed out all the time, chronically for months and months and months and years on end. The best tools, the best mechanisms that we know to modulate long-term stress might surprise you a little bit. First of all, there are going to be the things that don't surprise you, which is everyone knows getting regular exercise, getting good sleep, using real-time tools to try and tamp down the stress response, et cetera, that's all going to be really useful. The data really points to the fact that social connection and certain types of social connection in particular are what are going to mitigate or reduce long-term stress. And this is a particularly important issue nowadays where we have all these proxies or surrogates for social connection. We're online and texting with people a lot, so we can feel connected. Like the plane's about to take off and everyone's texting each other whether or not they have fear of flying or not. They're like, "Okay, see you. Love you. Hate you." Whatever it is that they're trying to communicate to people. Then plane lands, every phone's out, "See you. Love you. Hate you." Let's hope it's fewer hate yous. But everyone has this kind of need to stay connected to one another. Humans are incredibly social creatures. Now, there is a way to look at this whole business of social connection, not from just the kind of wishy-washy new agey perspective. And I want to point out that sometimes I'll say wishy-washy new agey. I have nothing against that. I just, my goal here is always to put scientific data and some neurochemistry on things so that for those of you that are into wishy-washy new agey stuff, you also can arm yourself with some arguments for those of the members of your family and your life that maybe aren't so tuned into the typical language around those practices like, "Oh, connection is really key. We all get oxytocin." Actually, did you know that connection between individuals rarely causes the release of oxytocin? Oxytocin is released in very particular circumstances like post-orgasm, baby and mother milk let down. It's associated with kind of really intense kinds of pair bonding things of mother and child. Also father and child, but especially mother and child, because its relationship to the lactation system. Couples post-sex. These kinds of things that reflect deep kind of layers of our biology. And oxytocin is not just released when we walk in and pat the dog on the head or we see somebody and we give them a hug and, "Hi, great to see you," fist bump. That's not a situation for oxytocin. The way to think about social connection and how it can mitigate some of the long-term effects of stress is really through the systems of neuromodulation like serotonin, and through blocking certain things that are really bad for us when we feel socially isolated. Things like Taqi Kynan. So, let me explain what these are. Serotonin again, is a neuromodulator. Neuromodulators are a little bit like playlists in the brain. They tend to amplify or bias the likelihood that certain brain circuits and body circuits are going to be activated and that others will not. Serotonin generally, and I realize I'm speaking very generally here, but it generally gives us feelings of wellbeing. At very high levels, it makes us feel blissed and it tends to make us feel like we have enough in our immediate environment. This is why some of the side effects of antidepressants that elevate serotonin, and actually can help a lot of people with depressive symptoms. But the side effects associated with drugs that increase serotonin tend to be reduced affect. They tend to kind of blunt affect or make people feel like their libido is lower. Desire goes down because the body has so much serotonin and the brain has so much serotonin, that one feels like they have enough. But serotonin, pharmacology aside or taking antidepressants aside a topic for another time, serotonin tends to make us feel good. When we see somebody that we recognize and trust, serotonin is released in the brain. And that has certain positive effects on the immune system and on other systems of neural repair and synopsis and things that really reinforce connections in the brain and prevent that long-term withering of connections. So, serotonin is tied to social connection. Now, social connection can take many forms. As many of you know, I am very attached to my dog. I hope he's attached to me. He's asleep most of the time. So, I don't know. And even if he was awake, I don't really know what I would ask him. But he seems more or less to be attached to me as well. And there's no scientific evidence that it has to be human-human attachment. I do have attachments to humans as well. But you can have attachments to other people. Some of those can be romantic attachments. They could be familial attachments that are non-romantic, friendship, pets, even attachments to things that just delight us. One of the things that really can mitigate against the long-term negative effects of chronic long-term stress isn't just having fun. We hear all this stuff, "You need to play and have fun." That can be a little bit of a tough concept, especially for the hard driving people or people that are stressed, but having a sense of delight, a sense of really enjoying something that you see and engage in, witness, or participate in, that is associated with the serotonin system. And certainly, play is one of those things. Social connection of various forms. Those are things to invest in. Some people might say, "Well, nobody wants to be my friend," or, "Nobody wants to engage socially anymore." I'll be the first to admit, social connection and friendship and relationships of all kinds to animals or humans or inanimate objects takes work. It takes investment. It takes time in not needing everything to be exactly the way you want it to be. I have a friend who struggles with this and oftentimes the conversations just circle back to the fact that when you want social connection, you often have to be more flexible. You have to eat on other people's schedules. Sometimes you have to eat things you don't necessarily want to eat the most in that moment or stay up a little later or wake up a little earlier. Social connection is something that we work for, but it is incredibly powerful. I want to, of course, tip my heart to, it's only appropriate to call him the great Robert Sapolsky, my colleague who I'm unfortunate to know at Stanford. Of course, he has talked about this quite a lot. So, I want to acknowledge Robert's incredible work and discussions around this. You can look up those materials online and his wonderful books. But primates, and we are primates, we are social species. And as Robert has said many times before, never before in any primate history, but in particular in human history have we interacted with so many strangers at a distance when we are not really connected to them. So, finding just a few people, even one or an animal or something that you delight in, believe it or not, has very positive effects on mitigating this long-term stress on improving various aspects of our life as it relates to stress and emotionality. So, that's the social connection part. The other thing is the social isolation that goes too long is associated in everything from flies, believe it or not, to mice and humans with this molecule of Taqi Kynan. Taqi Kynan is a molecule that makes us more fearful, paranoid, and impairs our immune system. And so, Taqi Kynan is like this internal punishment signal. It's like our body and our brain telling us, "You're not spending enough time with people that you really trust. You're not spending time doing things that you really enjoy." And I often think about Taqi Kynan for myself because I'm pretty hard driving. I have a lot of pursuits. I also have a lot of wonderful people and an incredibly wonderful bulldog in my life, but there are times when I can be so goal-directed and so in motion and trying to accomplish everything, that I sometimes forget about Taqi Kynan. And I like to remind myself so much so that I actually have a little post-it above my desk that says, "Taqi Kynan," to remind me that Taqi Kynan is this very sinister molecule that starts being secreted when we are not socially connected enough. And this is why long meals with friends or family where there are, we'll talk about phones in a moment, but where there's no intrusions, or even if there are, just feeling like we are connected suppresses Taqi Kynan. And Taqi Kynan is something you really want to avoid because chronic isolation, chronically high Taqi Kynan that's associated with long-term stress really depletes so many good functions of our brain and body and promote so many bad ones including irritability, paranoia, fear, et cetera. That is really something to avoid. And so, I want to highlight Taqi Kynan as something to avoid. I don't want to completely disregard oxytocin. It's just, the oxytocin has been built up a lot in the media and really serotonin works on much faster timescales. Now, how do you know if you're making serotonin? And you don't know in the moment, but you can learn if you pay attention to kind of recognize these feelings of comfort, trust, bliss, delight. And those are not weak terms. Those are not associated just with psychological terms. They are every bit as physiological as the movement of your muscles or the secretion of adrenaline. And many people focus now on gratitude. Gratitude is a little bit subjective. And here we're moving from some objective to kind of subjective things, but recognizing, and in particular, writing down things that you're thankful for, however small, they may seem, does seem to have a positive effect on the serotonin system. Now, there are a plethora of things that will also impact wellbeing and allow you to modulate your long-term stress. Reduce the likelihood that you'll engage in long-term stress. And we don't have time to go into all these, but of course, finding the diet and nutrition that's right for you, the exercise schedule that's right for you, the sleep schedule, all that. But do not underemphasize the social connection part, please. As well, there are some compounds that are not antidepressants. Although if you need antidepressants, then a clinician prescribes them to you. Please follow their advice if that's what is right for you. There are compounds that are not prescription compounds that can modulate the stress system. And sometimes because of the way that life is, we just don't have the opportunity to control life and to control our response to stress. And at least for myself, I can only talk about my own experience, I found it useful in times of chronic stress to start modulating some of the neurochemistry related to the stress response in order to help. Now, if a doctor prescribes you prednisone or prescribes you some other hormone or something, that's important, but what I'm talking about now are non-prescription things. You should check out examine.com, this free website which will allow you to put in any supplement and evaluate that supplement with they provide links in the so-called human effect matrix to PubMed. It tells you the exact subjects they were done in. It was a post-menopausal women. Was it kids? Was it normal adults? Was it people with autism, et cetera. Check out that site for any and all supplements you're considering or taking. I highly recommend it. I've no relationship to them. I just think it's a wonderful site that's curated all this important information. But some of these compounds are effective enough. They can kind of take the edge off. And I'll use them periodically myself. And so, I just thought I'd mentioned them since there a number of you that are interested in them. The three I want to focus on and one that I think you need to be cautious about that I've mentioned before, include ashwagandha, funny name, but that's what's it's called, L-theanine or theanine it's often called, and melatonin. Let's talk about melatonin first. Melatonin I talked about during the month on sleep. Melatonin is a hormone secreted from the pineal in direct relationship to how much darkness you are in. Not emotional darkness. But light suppresses melatonin. Melatonin helps you fall asleep. It doesn't help you stay asleep. I personally do not recommend supplementing melatonin because it's supplemented typically at very high levels. One to three milligrams or even more that is an outrageously high dose. It's super, super physiological compared to what you normally would make. It also has a number of potentially negative effects on the reproductive access and hormones there. Some people can take it without problems. If you like it and that's your thing, fine. I just want to cue to the fact that there can be issues. You should check on examine.com. Talk to your doctor, especially in kids, because melatonin suppresses the puberty response in a number of species. Enough about the negative things in melatonin except that people who take too much melatonin chronically, oftentimes when they're taking it to sleep or for whatever reason, yes, it can reduce anxiety and stress, but it also can reduce the output of the adrenals to the point where it can become problematic. Now, a note about adrenal burnout. There is actually no such thing as adrenal burnout under normal conditions. The adrenals have enough adrenaline to support 200 years of stress for better, for worse. The concept of adrenal burnout has origins in the work of Nobel Prize winner, Hans Selye, who actually discovered what he called the general adaptation syndrome. He discovered a lot of things about stress. He did some phenomenal work that turned out to be true. That we have stressors. There's something called distress. He talked about eustress, which is positive stress. Eustress has never really caught on in the kind of more general discussion. But he had this theory that if stress went on long enough, that you would eventually reach a phase called exhaustion. And that turned out to be wrong. Although many of you may feel exhausted after chronic stress, there isn't really a physiological exhaustion that happens. And that eventually got picked up and ran with the general public. And they talk about adrenal burnout. Too much coffee, adrenal burnout. You hear all this stuff. There is no such thing as adrenal burnout. The adrenals don't burn out. There is something, however, called adrenal insufficiency syndrome, which is a real physiological problem where some people have very impaired adrenals and they can't produce adrenaline. And melatonin taken at very high levels for periods of time that are too long can cause suppression of the cortisol and epinephrine released from the adrenals and can create a kind of pseudo adrenal insufficiency syndrome. So, be aware of melatonin for that reason. Please, I'm trying, I alone can't get rid of the phrase adrenal burnout. I'm not trying to give a hard time to anyone who feels burnt out or exhausted, but it is for other reasons. It is not because of the adrenals are burnt out. Unless you happen to have adrenal insufficiency syndrome. So, I'm not a fan of melatonin for a lot of reasons. Now I've mentioned several. The other is L-theanine. I've talked about L-theanine, which provided it's safe for you, can be taken 100 milligrams or 200 milligrams about 30 minutes or 60 minutes before sleep. It can enhance the transition to sleep and depth of sleep for many people. It increases GABA, this inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain. It tends to turn off our forebrain a little bit or reduce the activity of our kind of thinking systems and ruminating systems help people fall asleep. That's for sleep. But theanine has also been shown for people that are chronically anxious or chronically stressed to, if you look at the studies, I have a large collection of studies in front of me right now, if you want to see those links, I know if you want those, go to examine.com, put in theanine. They linked, for instance, it is known to significantly increase relaxation. There are four studies listed there with PubMed links. It is known to have a minor effect on anxiety, but eight studies have shown that. Which I think is a fairly large set of studies. Some of them in great journals. It also can reduce task completion anxiety. So, anxiety related to task completion. Not good for the procrastinators perhaps, but for those of you that are chronically stressed. It can increase attention a little bit, it can reduce blood pressure a little bit, improve sleep quality, et cetera. It definitely has a notable effect on stress, two studies in particular, that it can notably reduce the effects of stress. So, there's a lot there. It also has effects on insomnia, on some blood lipid profiles. And so, go to examine.com and check it out. But this is one reason why I supplement theanine for sleep. But if I'm feeling like I've been under a lot of stress and I'm not managing my stress very well with the short-term and medium-term tools that I talked about earlier, I might start taking a little bit of theanine especially in the late afternoon, which is when I tend to start to feel like I haven't gotten enough done and the day is kind of carrying on. And so, you can blunt the response to stress a little bit, which is why a lot of companies are now putting theanine into energy drinks. I am not a big fan of most energy drinks. Most of them have taurine, which I know some of you wrote to me and said, "Oh, taurine is great for all these reasons." Taurine also has effects on the microvasculature that at least for me, were not good. It cause bursting of microvasculature in my sclera, in my eyes, which is why I'm not a fan of any energy drink that has taurine or taurine generally. But that's just me. You have to decide for you. I'm sure in the comment section, there'll be a couple of taurinesters out there that will say, "But I love taurine." Great. Keep the taurine companies in business. But it's not for me. And I'd like people to know that it may or may not be for them. The other supplement that can be very useful is ashwagandha. Ashwagandha is known to lower anxiety and cortisol. There is six, there are, excuse me, six studies that collectively show reductions in cortisol, which is cortisol is typically associated with waking up in the morning, which is good. That's a healthy, brief cortisol bump that goes away provided you're getting your light at the right time of days at correct times of day, like morning and evening. But you don't want cortisol chronically elevated. That's associated with all the bad stuff about stress. There's a very strong effect of ashwagandha. You can find dosages at examine.com. They report in across six studies, 14.5 to 27.9 reduction in cortisol in otherwise healthy, but stressed individuals. Now, I don't know about kids. You have to look at what it says on various supplements. Most things here are being done in adults. So, please check carefully. But this is great. I mean, the opportunity for me anyway, to be able to take something that can help me reduce my cortisol so that I don't get some of the long-term effects of stress. And I'm not going to take ashwagandha year round. I would only do this if I was feeling like I wasn't managing my short and medium-term stress well. So, I don't take it on a regular basis. I do take it when I'm in these times when things are particularly stressful. It has their five other studies that show reduced stress. So, that's not cortisol measurements, but things like fatigue, cognitive impairment, et cetera. It does lower total cholesterol, which may or may not be good or bad for you up to 10%. So, some people don't want their cholesterol lowered. Some people might. Cholesterol, we'll talk about this in a month on hormones, but cholesterol is the molecule from which testosterone and estrogen and cortisol for that matter are synthesized. So, you don't want to get your cholesterol so low, then there are all sorts of negative effects, but you don't want it too high either. Mild effects in good clinical studies on reducing depression, probably associated with the effects on stress and some other things as well. So, ashwagandha is something I use from time to time. It's kind of interesting. L-theanine, I rarely will use those during the daytime, except under conditions where I'm feeling chronically stressed. So, check out the human effect matrix on examine.com. Again, a phenomenal website. I think I've sent them a few emails before. That's the only exchanges I've ever had with them. But I just think it's wonderful that they put together this resource. Otherwise we'd be stuck mining PubMed. They've collated the papers from PubMed with links to PubMed. So, terrific resource. So, social connection and some supplementation. Of course, diet, exercise, sleep for long-term stress. And now we're finally in a position to talk about what we have set out to do from the beginning, which is spend the month on emotions. It was very important that we discuss stress and we discuss in the context of short, medium, and long-term stress. That we discuss tools for short-term, medium-term, and long-term control. I don't really want to say mitigation of stress. Stress is going to happen. But our ability to modulate and control stress in real time offline using tools such as respiration, using tools such as dilation of gaze, using tools like social connection, maybe some supplements, certainly take care of your sleep and nutrition and exercise. Again, tons of resources and information in the sleep episodes. So, you can look there. We will do a month on hormones, on exercise, et cetera. But let's talk about emotions because in subsequent episodes, we're going to talk about OCD, we're going to talk about depression, we're going to talk about mania, we're going to be talking about dopamine and all sorts of things. But at the core of emotions is this question, what is an emotion? Well, it's complex. There isn't a single brain area for any one of these things that we call emotions. My framework, and I think the modern science, both psychology and neuroscience is pretty well-aligned with what Lisa Feldman Barrett has taught about. Now, Lisa's at Northeastern University. She runs a big lab there. She's a world expert in emotion. She's written two books that are really wonderful. One is "How Emotions Are Made," which was her first book. The second one is "Seven and a Half Facts About the Brain." It's a wonderful book as well. It came out more recently. I hosted Lisa on an Instagram live once. Maybe we'll get her here on the podcast if we're lucky. We don't agree on everything about the neuroscience of emotions, but I subscribed to most everything that I've heard Lisa say. In particular, the fact that emotions are context-dependent. There's a cultural dependence, et cetera. I look at things mainly through the lens of physiology and neuroscience and kind of low-level circuitry. And one way to think about emotions that I think is consistent and I think Lisa would generally approve, I can't speak for her, but I would hope she would generally approve of this description, is that when our internal state of stress or calm matches the demands on us or is mismatched from the demands on us, we tend to interpret those as good or bad. Let me give you an example. If I am feeling very anxious, very stressed inside, and I have a lot to do, that doesn't feel good, but it's really no different than if I'm very tired and I have a lot to do because there's this mismatch. I'm not in the right internal state, my internal state is incorrect rather, to meet the demands that are being placed upon me. So, in both cases, whether I'm too tired or I'm too stressed to do what I need to do, the valence, meaning the value that I assigned to that is I don't feel good. It's not a good situation and I don't feel good. Now, I might call it stressed, I might call it anxious, I might call it worried, I might call it a number of things, but it's not good. However, when I'm tired and I want to fall asleep, well then I feel good because that's what the demand is. I need to go to sleep and I'm tired. If I'm wide awake and I need to fall asleep, then that's not good. And then the brain tends to go down the direction of interpreting the situation as a bad one. So, while the discussion around emotions is far more nuanced and more elaborate than this, one way to think about your relationship to emotions is whether or not your internal state is matching the demands that are upon you. So, in that way, we don't really place so much value on whether or not we're feeling alert or sleepy. We only place value on whether or not that alertness whether or not it's full-blown stress or not or our sleepiness, whether or not we're falling asleep or just a little bit drowsy, whether or not that matches the conditions that we face. And it's a useful framework to have. And it's the reason in part why I spent this last hour and a half or so talking about stress and how to control stress. One reason we did that is because I think it's a valuable opportunity to learn some tools and understand stress and really learn how to take control of stress, which I think we could all benefit from doing regardless of age. The other reason is that when you start to understand that you have this kind of see-saw system in your body, this autonomic nervous system that takes you from alert and calm to stressed to full-blown panic, it has that capacity, or from sleepy and drowsy to passing out tired to God forbid, let's hope never, but a coma, right? That you're basically on this see-saw all the time. And where you are on that see-saw of alertness or calmness positions you to be in better reaction to the demands that you face. Whether or not the thing that you face is a need to fall asleep or to listen quietly and not react. You now know, for instance, that if your job is to take feedback, when maybe you're going in for a job evaluation or you're in a relationship where there was a call for a discussion and somebody needs to talk to you about something and we need to talk about something, you're going to there you're like, "Goodness, this is going to be rough." Learning to reduce that stress response a little bit so that you are in a position to hear the information better, and remember, from a previous episode, if you close your eyes, you'll be able to actually focus on the information better. There's your permission to not look someone directly in the eye when they talk to you if you really want to hear what they have to say. You will be able to modulate that stress response and lean into life better. You will be able to react to things in a more effective way and to not be reactive. And this is really one of the important things to me anyway, is that so much of the language around psychology, which I think is a wonderful field, but pop psychology in particular is be responsive, not reactive. Well, great. But then how does one do that? Well, one does that by modulating their short-term stress response in real time. Not by saying, "Hold on, I need to meditate. Hold on, I need a massage and then I can have this conversation." By modulating the reactivity in real time. How does one, for instance, be mindful? Which is a beautiful concept, but how are you mindful? Well, I don't know, when I'm moving through my day, a lot of times I'm just trying to get things done. And as soon as I start monitoring and seeing what I'm doing and kind of third-personing what I'm doing, it actually takes me out of the effectiveness and experience of what I'm doing. So for me, sometimes that mindfulness, that observer, as they call it, is something that doesn't help me. It actually hinders me. What's important to me is to be able to work and focus and then to be able to disengage. To be able to do a non-sleep depressed or to be able to still fall asleep even though I've been working hard until 9:30 to put my head down at 10 o'clock and be out cold sleeping by 10:02. That's possible if you can learn to control this stress response. And to do that, we can't use the mind to control. The mind, we need tools. And so, a lot of the people being grumpy or anxious or depressed, a lot of that, provided it's not for some underlying neurochemical reason that's chronic, a lot of that come from being poorly rested, from overworked, from feeling like the world is bearing down on us. And so, rather than take a subjective view of this, I take the view of objective physiology. What can we do that's anchored to these neuronal systems in our body, in our brain, in our eyes, in our diaphragm, et cetera, and look to those as tools leavers that we can pull on and push and maneuver through life in a way where we start to feel like we have some agency. We actually have some real control because we're controlling the internal landscape. So, I think that ought to set the stage for where we're headed next, which is to talk about all the things that you normally think of when you think of emotions, like happiness, like awe, like joy. And we will get into some of that. But all of that rests firmly on the foundation of this thing we call the autonomic nervous system. This stress modulation. This calming modulation system. And again, whether or not you're activated or you're calm is not good or bad, it depends on the situation. Certainly, when you want to fall asleep, being activated isn't good. When you have work to do, being activated is great. So, I hope today you were able to take a slightly different view of this thing that we call stress. Not just see it as evil, but see it as powerful and useful in certain contexts. Great for us in certain contexts and problematic in other contexts. And as well to think about the various tools that I've presented that can allow you to adjust and modulate your internal levels of alertness or calmness so that you can lean more effectively into life, which includes sleep and social connection and the work you have to do. And of course, acknowledges that the events in the world are beyond our control. What's in our control is how we react to them. Something that's commonly said in the wellness and self-help and psychology world, but for which there often aren't as many concrete tools that we can really look to and trust in real time. And of course, there are other tools out there. As always, I'll say it, I strive to be accurate, but I'll never be exhaustive. I might have exhausted you. I might've cured your insomnia with this discussion today, but in all seriousness, my goal is to bring you tools and information so that you can manage better through life. So, thanks so much. I very much want to thank all of you for your support for the podcast. It's really been wonderful. If you've subscribed to the podcast on YouTube, Apple, or Spotify, or maybe even all three, terrific. If you haven't, please do subscribe on YouTube, Apple, or Spotify, or maybe even all three, which would be wonderful. On Apple, you can leave a five-star review if you think we deserve that as well as a comment reviewing us. If you have suggestions, if you have questions regarding the content of the podcast or things that you'd like us to cover in the future, please put those in the comment section on YouTube as well. If you could recommend the podcast to friends, family members, coworkers, that you think would benefit from the information, maybe even send them the links if you like, that's tremendously helpful. Today, as in previous episodes, I've touched on some things as they relate to supplementation. As always, I always cover a lot of tools that are zero-cost tools that don't involve ingesting anything at all, behavioral tools. But I mentioned some supplements that I particularly find useful. With supplements, it's a complicated landscape, often because many supplement companies don't put in the bottle what they say is in the particular product. We've partnered with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E, because Thorne is a supplement company that we know to have the highest levels of stringency. It's used by the Mayo Clinic. It's used by all the major sports organizations for that particular reason and because their quality standards are exceptionally high. If you'd like to try any supplements and see the ones that I take, you can go to Thorne, thorne.com/u/huberman. And if you do that, you'll get 20% off anything that's listed there on my page as well as any of the supplements that Thorne sells. So that's Thorne, thorne.com/u/huberman to get 20% off anything that Thorne sells. In addition, if you want to follow us on Twitter we're there @hubermanlab or an Instagram @hubermanlab. I also do some content on "Huberman Lab," a little neuroscience posts. Some are reposts of clips from the podcast. Others are unique content that you won't find on the podcast. So you can follow us @hubermanlab. Also, if you like check out our Patreon, patreon.com/AndrewHuberman. And most of all, and as always, really appreciate your time and attention today. I hope you practice some of the tools if they're right for you. I hope you think hard about stress and how you can control your stress. And above all, as always, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 340 ---
Video ID: mcPSRWUYCv0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mcPSRWUYCv0
Title: Control Pain & Heal Faster with Your Brain
Published: 2021-03-01 13:30:10 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I describe the science of how and why pain arises in the body and brain, and how we can actively control our experience of pain. I discuss inflammation, stress, acupuncture, limb damage and Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI). I review protocols that leverage the lymphatic and nervous system to accelerate pain relief and healing in a variety of situations. Other topics discussed include how heat versus cold impacts neurons and wounds, red-light, sunlight, stem cells and more.

For an updated list of our current sponsors, please visit our website as previous sponsors mentioned in this podcast episode may no longer be affiliated with us: https://hubermanlab.com/sponsors

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

Resources
The Ready State/Dr. Kelly Starrett: https://thereadystate.com
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/thereadystate
Twitter: https://twitter.com/thereadystate
Love and Pain Study: https://academic.oup.com/painmedicine/article/15/6/947/1826529

Timestamps
00:00:00 Introduction/Avenues for Support  
00:04:58 Deliberate Unlearning  
00:06:43 Pain, Injury and Regeneration 
00:09:17 A System of Touch (Somatosensation)  
00:11:42 Pain and Injury are Dissociable  
00:15:19 Objective versus Subjective Control of Experience 
00:16:15 Plasticity of Perception 
00:16:41 Lack of Pain Is Self-Destructive; So Is Excessive Pain 
00:18:42 Homoculous, Ratonculous, Dogunculus  
00:19:05 “Sensitivity” explained 
00:21:30 Inflammation  
00:22:24 Phantom Limb Pain 
00:24:00 Top-down Relief of Pain by Vision 
00:26:41 From Deaf to Hearing Sounds 
00:28:10 Pain Is In The Mind & Body 
00:29:44 Recovering Movement Faster After Injury 
00:35:00 Don’t Over Compensate 
00:37:34. Concussion, TBI & Brain Ageing 
00:40:49 The Brain’s Sewage Treatment System: Glymphatic Clearance 
00:43:05 Body Position & Angle During Sleep 
00:44:30 Types of Exercise For Restoring & Maintaining Brain Health 
00:47:33 Ambulance Cells in The Brain 
00:49:20 True Pain Control by Belief and Context 
00:51:45 Romantic Love and Pain 
00:55:05 Dopaminergic Control of Pain 
00:57:15 Acupuncture: Rigorous Scientific Assessment 
01:07:32 Vagus Activation and Autonomic Control of Pain 
01:08:30 Inflammation, Turmeric, Lead and DHT 
01:11:40 Adrenalin: Wim Hof, Tummo, “Super-Oxygenation” Breathing 
01:14:53 Protocols For Accelerating Tissue Repair & Managing Pain 
01:17:55 Ice Is Not Always Nice (For Pain and Injury): Sludging, Fascia, Etc. 
01:22:02 Chronic and/or Whole Body Pain; Red-Light Therapy, Sunlight 
01:26:10 Glymphatics and Sleep 
01:26:29 Stem Cells, Platelet Rich Plasma (PRP: Shams, Shoulds and Should Nots 
01:31:38 Young Blood: Actual Science  
01:35:44 Synthesis, Support & Resources 

#HubermanLab #Pain #Neuroscience

The Huberman Lab podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English (United States)
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero-cost-to-consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is ExpressVPN. ExpressVPN is a virtual private network that keeps your data secure by routing your data and online activities through their servers and keeping your data safe and secure but also not selling your data to third parties. I started using ExpressVPN because unfortunately I had my bank accounts hacked. I was traveling a lot and I typically go on hotel or airline or other public Wi-Fi from time to time and I don't know how it happened, but somehow my information got out there, and as I learned more from my friends and people that work in the tech community, it turns out that many networks are not secure, so with ExpressVPN, it keeps all your information secure. It keeps information about your passwords secure. It keeps information about the websites that you visit secure, and as I mentioned earlier, they never give away or sell your data. The nice thing is you can use ExpressVPN, it runs in the background and you don't even really realize that it's on. It works on your phone, it works on your laptop, it even works on your smart TV. If you'd like to try ExpressVPN, you can go to expressvpn.com/huberman to get three months free on their one-year program. I love ExpressVPN. I use it even when I'm at home, and so if you want to try it, you can go to expressvpn.com/huberman and you'll get three months free on their one-year program. The second sponsor of today's podcast is Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I started taking Athletic Greens in 2012 because I wanted to cover my vitamin and mineral bases. I didn't know which things to take. I found it really dizzying to know which vitamins and minerals to purchase and Athletic Greens allowed me to get all the things I needed to cover my bases in one easy to consume formula that also happens to taste really good. I mix mine with water and a little bit of lemon juice. The probiotics in Athletic Greens are also really important to me because now there's an abundance of data showing that the gut microbiome, which is supported by probiotics, is important for gut-brain axis, mood, metabolic function, hormone function, just a huge number of biological functions and health parameters. If you want to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, and if you do that, they'll give you a year's supply of vitamin D3 K2. Vitamin D3 also has lot of support from the scientific literature showing that it's important for immune function, so if you go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, you'll get Athletic Greens plus the year's supply of vitamin D3 K2 and they'll give you five free travel packets. Mixing up powders is a little bit messy sometimes when you're on the road, if you're in the car, you're on the plane or you're on the move. These travel packets make everything really clean and really easy. Once again, that's athleticgreens.com/huberman for Athletic Greens, the five free travel packets, and the year's supply of vitamin D3 K2. Many of you have graciously asked how you can help support the Huberman Lab Podcast. There are several ways that you can do that. One is to check out our sponsors, the other is we've set up a Patreon account. You can go to patreon.com/andrewhuberman and that allows you to donate to the podcast at a variety of different levels. In addition, if you could subscribe to the podcast on YouTube, that's terrific. If you haven't done that already, please do so, and please leave a comment. If you want to make suggestions about future episodes, please also put that in the comment section. If you subscribe on Apple or Spotify or both, that helps us, and as well, Apple gives you the opportunity to leave a review and give us a five star rating if you feel we deserve a five star rating, and of course, please recommend the podcast to your friends, to your family members, anyone that you think would benefit from the information. Really, the answer to your question of how you can support the podcast is you don't have to buy products, although checking out the sponsors does help. You don't have to donate to Patreon. We, of course, can't require you to subscribe and fill out reviews and things of that sort, but we like to think that by providing a number of different ways to support the podcast, some of which are zero cost, some of which, if you like, gives you the opportunity to contribute financially, that's terrific as well. Thank you so much. We really appreciate your interest in helping us keep this coming your way. Thank you. Let's continue our discussion about neuroplasticity. This incredible feature of our nervous system that allows it to change itself in response to experience, and even in ways that we consciously and deliberately decide to change it. That's an incredible feature. No other organ in our body has that capability. Our nervous system, which governs everything about who we are, how we feel and what we do, does have that capability. The issue is most people don't know how to access neuroplasticity. Children readily access neuroplasticity and they don't even realize that they're doing it. Adults want neuroplasticity and so that's what this entire month of the Huberman Lab Podcast has been about. We've explored neuroplasticity from a variety of different perspectives. We talked about representational plasticity. We talked about the importance of focus and reward. We talked about this amazing and somewhat surprising aspect of the vestibular system, how altering our relationship to gravity, and in addition to that, making errors as we try and learn, can open up windows to plasticity, but we have not really talked so much about directing the plasticity toward particular outcomes, and thus far, we really haven't talked yet about how to undo things that we don't want. I've talked about learning and I say learn a language, learn free throws, learn a particular motor skill, et cetera, but what about what we would call unlearning or about removing some aspect of our experience that we don't want? And so today, we are going to explore that aspect of neuroplasticity and we are going to do that in the context of a very important and somewhat sensitive topic which is pain regeneration, and in some cases, injury to the nervous system. For those of you that are fortunate enough to not have or had a concussion or not have or know someone who is experiencing chronic or acute pain, I encourage you to stay in here with us because a lot of the information that we are going to cover has direct relevance to neuroplasticity for other purposes. We, as always here on this podcast, are going to discuss some of the science, we get into mechanism, but we also really get at principles. Principles are far more important than any one experiment or one description of mechanism and certainly far more important than any one protocol because principles allow you to think about your nervous system and work with it in ways that best serve you. They are very flexible batches of information. We are going to talk about the principles of neuroplasticity for removing pain and wound healing and injury. We're going to talk about acupuncture, of all things. We are going to talk about modern medicine's attempt to try and restore youth to the aging or injured or demented brain, and we are going to definitely talk about tools. Got a lot of tools. I consulted a number of fantastic colleagues at Stanford, at Harvard Medical School, and in the greater community of tissue rehabilitation, injury and pain management in preparation for this podcast. I do want to be very clear and just remind you that I'm not a medical doctor. I'm a professor, so I don't prescribe anything. I profess things. I have my beliefs, but the podcast is for information purposes. I do hope that the tools that we discuss will be of benefit to you, but as always, you should talk to your doctor or healthcare provider about any tools that you plan to add or are looking to explore, as well as anything that you might look to remove from your daily protocols. In other words, don't change anything without consulting an expert first. You are responsible for your health, not me, and I say this not just to protect me but also to protect you. Please keep that in mind as we move forward and I'm very excited to share with you this information because I do feel that it can be of great benefit to a number of people. Let's start our discussion about pain and sensation and regeneration and wound healing with a discussion about a very important system in the nervous system, which is the somatosensory system. The somatosensory system is, as the name implies, involved in understanding touch, physical feeling on our body, and the simplest way to think about the somatosensory system is that we have little sensors and those sensors come in the form of neurons, nerve cells, that reside in our skin and in the deeper layers below the skin, and indeed, we do. We have some that correspond to, and we should say respond to, mechanical touch, so pressure on the top of my hand or a pinpoint, or other sensors, for instance, respond to heat, to cold. Some respond to vibration. We have a huge number of different receptors in our skin and they take that information and send it down these wires that we call axons in the form of electrical signals to our spinal cord and then up to the brain, and within the spinal cord and brain, we have centers that interpret that information, that actually make sense of those electrical signals, and this is amazing because none of those sensors has a different unique form of information that it uses. It just sends electrical potentials into the nervous system. The nervous system, you somehow decode what a given stimulus on your skin is. Maybe it's the wind blowing gently and deflecting some of the hairs on your arm or maybe it's a sharp pinprick or a hot stove or the warmth of a glowing fire. That all arrives in your nervous system in the form of these electrical things we call action potentials, which is just amazing, and then the brain computes them and make sense of them. We have peripheral sensors and we've got stations up in our brain and within our spinal cord that make sense of all the stuff coming in. Pain and the sensation of pain is, believe it or not, a controversial word in the neuroscience field. People prefer to use the word nociception. Nociceptors are the sensors in the skin that detect particular types of stimuli. It actually comes from the Latin word nocere which means to harm, and why would neuroscientists not want to talk about pain? Well, it's very subjective. It has a mental component and a physical component. We cannot say that pain is simply an attempt to avoid physical harm to the body, and here's why. They actually can be dissociated from one another. A good example would be if, God forbid, you were exposed to high levels of radiation, such as working with some sort of material that was radioactive or you were near a former radioactive plant or some some radiation, excessive X-rays, et cetera, you wouldn't feel any pain during the X-rays. In fact, you don't. If you've ever had X-rays, as I have, you don't feel anything. They put you under that lead blanket, they run behind a wall and then they, in my case, then they take these pictures of your teeth and it's really scary because you go, "Something really terrible must be happening here," but you don't feel anything, but there can be a lot of tissue damage. There can be mutations introduced to cells, et cetera. I've had X-rays, I'm not saying people shouldn't have X-rays, but excessive X-rays certainly are not good for human beings, likewise with excessive exposure to any radiation. There can be tissue damage without the physical perception or mental perception of pain at all. As well, there can be the belief of pain or the feeling of pain without there being tissue damage, and there's a famous case that was published in the "British Journal of Medicine" where a construction worker, I think he fell is how the story went, and a 14-inch nail went through his boot and up through the boot and he was in excruciating pain just beyond anything he'd experienced. He reported that he couldn't even move in any dimension, even a tiny bit, without feeling excruciating pain. They brought him into the clinic, into the hospital, they were able to cut away the boot and they realized that the nail had gone between two toes and it had actually not impaled the skin at all. His visual image of the nail going through his boot gave him the feeling, the legitimate feeling, that he was experiencing the pain of a nail going through his foot, which is incredible because it speaks to the power of the mind in this pain scenario and it also speaks to the power of the specificity. It's not like he thought that his foot was on fire. He thought, because he saw a nail going through his foot, well, it was going through his boot, but he thought it was going through his foot, that it was sharp pain of the sort that a nail would produce, and there are thousands of these kinds of case reports out there. That is not to say that all pain that we experience is in our head, but it really speaks to the incredible capacity that these top-down, these higher-level cognitive functions have in interpreting what we're experiencing out in the periphery, even just on the basis of what we see, and the example of radiation speaks to the fact that pain and tissue damage are dissociable from one another. Why are we talking about pain during a month on neuroplasticity? Well, it turns out that the pain system offers us a number of different principles that we can leverage to, A, ensure that if we are ever injured, we are able to understand the difference between injury and pain because there is a difference, that if we're ever in pain, that we can understand the difference between injury and pain, that we will be able to interpret our pain, and during the course of today's podcast, I'm going to cover protocols that help eliminate pain from both ends of the spectrum, from the periphery, at the level of the injury, and through these top-down mental mechanisms. A lot of times on this podcast, in fact mostly, I tend to center on the physiology, on the really objective things that you can describe and talk about, diaphragmatic movement or sunlight of a particular number of photons, et cetera, but today's a really exciting opportunity for us to discuss some of the more subjective things. Believe it or not, we're going to talk about love. A colleague of mine at Stanford, who runs a major pain clinic, is working on and has published quality peer-reviewed data on the role of love in modulating the pain response, only there's a twist to it and I'm not going to reveal it just yet, but it turns out that the specific type of connection one has to a romantic partner actually dictates whether or not their love for them will alleviate physical pain and the effects are really robust. It's an amazing literature, and so what we're talking about today is plasticity of perception, which has direct bearing on emotional pain and has direct bearing on trauma and other things that we discussed in previous episodes a little bit but that we're going to explore even more in an entire month about those topics. Let's get started in thinking about what happens with pain, and I will describe some examples of some kind of extreme cases. For instance, I will tell you just now that there is a mutation, a genetic mutation in a particular sodium channel. A sodium channel is one of these little holes in neurons that allows them to fire action potentials. It's important to the function of the neuron. It's also important for the development of certain neurons, and there's a particular mutation, there are kids that are born without this sodium channel 1.7, if you want to look it up. Those kids experience no pain, no pain whatsoever, and it is a terrible situation. They burn themselves. They tend to rest on their limbs too long. They don't make the microadjustments. You might see me swiveling around in my chair, moving around a lot. Those microadjustments are actually normal, healthy microadjustments that prevent us from going into pain. They don't make those adjustments. They don't get the feedback that they're in a particular position and so they never make those adjustments and their joints get destroyed, essentially. They don't tend to live very long due to accidents. It's a really terrible and unfortunate circumstance. Some people have a mutation in the same channel where they make too much of this channel so they feel too much pain. In fact, it's reasonable to speculate that one of the reasons, not all, but one of the reasons why people might differ in their sensitivity to pain is by way of genetic variation in how many of these sorts of receptors that they express. People who make too much of this receptor experience extreme pain from even subtle stimuli. The good news is there are good drug treatments that can block specifically this sodium channel 1.7 and so those people get a lot of relief from taking such drugs. Pain and how much pain we are sensitive to or insensitive to probably has some genetic basis, and then of course, there are things that we can do to make sure that we experience less pain, although pain has this adaptive role. Let's talk about some of the features of how we're built physically and how that relates to pain and how we can recover from injury. First of all, we have maps of our body surface in our brain. It's called a homunculus. In a rat, believe it or not, I'm not making this up, it's called a ratunculus. In Costello, my dog, who is snoring behind me, it's a dogunculus. I could get into the nomenclature and why it's called this, but it's basically a representation of the body surface. That representation is scaled in a way that matches sensitivity, so the areas of your body that are most sensitive have a lot more brain real estate devoted to them. Your back is an enormous piece of tissue compared to your fingertip, but your back has fewer receptors devoted to it and the representation of your back in your brain is actually pretty small, whereas the representation of your finger is enormous. How big a brain area is devoted to a given body part is directly related to the density of receptors in that body part, not the size of the body part, and that's why if we were to draw your homunculus or Costello's dogunculus, what we would find is that certain areas, like the lips, like the fingertips, like the genitalia, like the eyes and the area around the face, would have a huge representation, whereas the back, the torso, and areas of the body that are less sensitive are going to have smaller representations. It'd be a very distorted map. You can actually know how sensitive a given body part is and how much brain area is devoted to it through what's called two-point discrimination. You can do this experiment if you want. I think I've described this once or twice before, but basically if you have someone put, maybe take two pens and put them maybe six inches apart on your back and touch while you're facing away and they'll ask you how many points they're touching you and you say two, but if they move those closer together, say three inches, you're likely to experience it as one point of contact, whereas on your finger, you could play that game all day and as long as there's a millimeter or so spacing, you will know that it's two points as opposed to one and that's because there's more pixels, more density of receptors. This has direct bearing to pain because it says that areas of the body that have denser receptors are going to be more sensitive to pain than to others, and where we have more receptors, we tend to have more blood vessels and glia, which are the support cells, and other cells that lend to the inflammation response and that's really important. Just as a rule of thumb, areas of your body that are injured that are large areas that have low sensitivity before injury likely are going to experience less pain and the literature shows will heal more slowly because they don't have as many cells around to produce inflammation, and you might say, "Wait, I thought inflammation is bad." Well, one of the things I really want to get across today is that inflammation is not bad. Inflammation out of control is bad, but inflammation is wonderful. Inflammation is the tissue repair response and we are going to talk about subjective and objective ways to modulate inflammation after tissue injury, even after just exercise that's been too intense. You have this map of your body surface. It's sensitive in different ways. Now you know why. You've got your neurobiology of somatosensation 101 under your belt now. We didn't cover everything, but we'll touch on some of the other details as we go forward. I thought it might be a nice time to just think about the relationship between the periphery and the central maps in a way that many of you have probably heard about before, which will frame the discussion a little bit better, which is phantom limb pain. Some of you are probably familiar with this, but for people that have an arm or a leg or a finger or some other portion of their body amputated, it's not uncommon for those people to feel as if they still have that limb or appendage or piece of their body intact, and typically, unfortunately, the sensation of that limb is not one of the limb being nice and relaxed and just there. The sensation is that the limb is experiencing pain or is contorted in the specific orientation that it was around the time of the injury. If someone has a blunt force to the hand and they end up having their hand amputated, typically they will continue to feel pain in their phantom hand, which is pretty wild, and that's because the representation of that hand is still intact in the cortex, in the brain, and it's trying to balance its levels of activity. Normally it's getting what's called proprioceptive feedback. Proprioception is just our knowledge of where our limbs are in space. It's an extremely important aspect of our somatosensory system, and there's no proprioceptive feedback and so a lot of the circuits start to ramp up their levels of activity and they become very conscious of the phantom limb. Before my lab was at Stanford, I was at UC San Diego and one of my colleagues was a guy, everyone just calls him by his last name, Ramachandran, who is famous for understanding this phantom limb phenomenon and developing a very simple but very powerful solution to it that speaks to the incredible capacity of top-down modulation, and top-down modulation, the ability to use one's brain cognition and senses to control pain in the body, is something that everyone, not just people missing limbs or in chronic pain, can learn to benefit from because it is a way to tap into our ability to use our mind to control perceptions of what's happening in our body, and this is not a mystical statement. This is not about mind, I guess, as much as it is brain to control our perceptions of our body. What did Ramachandran do? Ramachandran had people who were missing a limb put their intact limb into a box that had mirrors in it such that when they looked in the box and they moved their intact limb, the opposite limb, which was a reflection of the intact limb 'cause they're missing the opposite limb, they would see it as if it was intact, and as they would move their intact limb, they would visualize with their eyes the limb that's in the place of the absent limb, so this is all by mirrors, moving around and they would feel immediate relief from the phantom pain, and he would tell them and they would direct their hand toward a orientation that felt comfortable to them. Then they would exit the mirror box, they would take their hand out, and they would feel as if the hand was now in its relaxed normal position. You could get real time, in moments, remapping of the representation of the hand. Now, that's amazing. This is the kind of thing that all of us would like to be able to do if we are in pain. If you stub your toe, if you break your ankle, if you take a hard fall on your bike or if you're in chronic pain. Wouldn't it be amazing to be able to use a mind trick, but it's not a trick because it's real, visual imagery, to remap your representation of your body surface and where your body is. That is something that we could all benefit from because if you do anything for long enough, including live, you're going to experience pain of some sort, and this, again I just want to remind you, isn't just about physical injuries and pain, this has direct relevance to emotional pain as well, which, of course, we'll talk about. The Ramachandran studies were really profound because they said a couple things. One, plasticity can be very fast, that it can be driven by the experience of something, just the visual experience. He had people do this mirror box thing but not look into the mirror box and they didn't get the remapping, so it required visual imagery coming in. We also know, for instance, that in cases like where people are congenitally deaf, the cochlear implant, which is simply a way of putting, it's not simple, but it's a way of putting in a device that replaces the cochlea, the device that we're normally born with in the ear that has these little what are called hair cells that deflect according to sound waves and allow us to hear. By replacing the normal hearing apparatus that's deficient in deaf people with this cochlear implant, the brain can make sense of this artificial ear, basically, it's not the outside ear, not the pinna, but the inner ear, and they can start to hear sounds. Some people really like the artificial cochlea. They really benefit from it. It restores their ability to hear and they like it. Other people don't. Some deaf people would prefer not to hear anything, can be very disruptive to them, and some of that might have to do with the need for further better engineering of these artificial cochleas, but all this really speaks to the fact that the brain is an adaptive device. It will respond to what you give it. It is not a device that is fixed. In fact, the essence of the brain, especially the human brain, is to take sensory inputs and to make sense of those, meaning cognitive sense, and then to interpret those signals, and so this may come as a shock to some of you and by no means am I trying to be insensitive, but pain is a perceptual thing as much as it's a physical thing. It's a belief system about what you're experiencing in your body and that has important relevance for healing different types of injury and the pain associated with that injury. In people's pursuit for neuroplasticity, a question that comes up every once in a while is people will say, "If I just brush my teeth with the opposite hand for a couple nights in a row, will I get neuroplasticity?" And the answer is probably yes. It's a deliberate action. You're focusing on it. There's an end goal. You're very likely to make errors, like jamming up into your lips and gums at first and then getting better at it, and as you heard in last episode, making errors is really important 'cause those errors are the signal that plasticity needs to happen, and then when you get the actions correct, then those correct actions are programmed in. I'm not sure that brushing one's teeth with the opposite hand is the most effective use of this incredible thing that we have, which is plasticity. It's not going to open up plasticity for many other things. If that were really important to you, for whatever reason, maybe you have a crowded bathroom and it's easier to do on one side or the other, then fine, but it's kind of hard to imagine why this would be a highly adaptive behavior, unless, of course, you have an injured limb or you're missing a limb, and that gets me to some really exciting and important studies that were performed mostly in the '90s as well as in the 2000s, and that, for now, there is really a solid base of data. There's really a center of mass around a particular set of experiments that point to particular protocols for how to overcome motor injury, and this may resonate with some of you who've ever been injured to the point where you couldn't walk well, temporarily, I hope, or even longer. Think about a sprained ankle scenario or a broken arm scenario. We're all familiar with the stories of people having a cast on and then getting the cast off and the particular limb that wasn't being used that was casted is much smaller and atrophied. Most of that atrophy, you might be surprised to learn, is not because the muscles aren't being used. It's because the nerves sending signals to those muscles are not active and therefore the muscles aren't contracting. Work done by a guy named Timothy Schallert and his graduate students and postdocs, Theresa Jones and others, in the '90s and 2000s showed something really wonderful that I think we can all benefit from should we have an injury and even if we simply want to balance out imbalances in our motor activity, and I think all of us tend to be stronger on one side or the other side. Usually a right-handed person will be stronger in their left arm, not always, for compensatory reasons. Some other time we can talk about handwriting. The lefties likely will be stronger in their right arm, although it depends on whether or not people are hook righties, that's when you hook around and write from the top, or hook lefties. There are all sorts of theories about this that we can talk about, right brain, left brain, math proficiency, et cetera. In any event, what Schallert and colleagues showed was that if we have damage to our brain in the sensory motor pathways, any number of different sensory motor pathways, or we have damage to a limb, could be a leg, could be an arm, could be a hand, there's great benefit to restricting the use of the opposite, better-performing, uninjured limb or hand or other part of the body. They had about a dozen papers showing that if there was damage centrally in the brain or there was damage to a limb, so unilateral damage, as we say, one side, the thing to do is not to cast up the damaged side, although you need to do that to protect the limb, of course, from further damage. If it's a broken arm, you need to cast the arm or you need to brace the arm, but that the key thing was to restrict movement of the intact, uninjured, opposite limb, and when they did that, it forced some movement in the injured limb and remarkably, through connections from the two sides of the brain, through the corpus callosum, this huge fiber pathway that links the two sides of the brain, they saw plasticity on both sides of the brain. This makes sense when you hear it. Let's say I injure my left ankle and I'm limping along or I'm using crutches. You would think, well, the last thing you want to do is injure your opposite limb or not use your opposite limb. My right ankle is perfectly fine, but if I lean too hard on my right limb and I take all the work out of the left limb, the left ankle, that's actually setting up a situation where there's going to be runaway asymmetry in the central pathways and the nerve-to-muscle pathways on my left side, and so what they suggested and what they showed in a variety of experiments was that by encouraging activity of the injured limb, provided it could be done without pain, and importantly, not just exercising that limb or part of the body but restricting the opposite healthy part of the body, that the speed of recovery was significantly faster. Now, I want to repeat, you don't want to go injuring something further. That's probably the worst thing you could do, but in some cases where people have damage in their brain, the limbs are perfectly fine, but the motor signals aren't getting down to the limbs, and in that case, the limb is fine, so you actually are free to use either limb as much as you want, and in that case, you don't want to rely on the uninjured pathway too much. In fact, you want to restrict the uninjured pathway. I find these studies remarkable and they've been followed up on at the molecular level, at the cellar level many times, and I think the physiotherapists out there and the rest of you who are involved in sports medicine and some of the physicians will say, "Well, of course that makes perfect sense," but oftentimes this is not what happens. Oftentimes what happens is it's all about resting and limiting inflammation, et cetera, of the injured limb or the limbs corresponding to the injured part of the brain, and these experiments and the collection of them point to the fact that the balance between the right and left side of our body is always dynamic. It's always being updated at the level of neural circuitry, the Ramachandran studies with the mirror box support that too, and that even slight imbalances in the two sides of the body can get amplified, and so when you're in a situation where one side is injured or the brain is injured representing one side of the body, the key thing to do is to really overwork the side that needs the work and to restrict the activity of the side that doesn't need the work because it's healthy, and this has great semblance to ocular dominance plasticity, which I talked about a couple episodes ago. I won't go into it in detail, but where the Nobel Prize winning neurobiologists Torsten Wiesel and David Hubel showed that if one eye is closed early in development, that the representation of the opposite eye in the brain is completely overtaken by the intact eye. This is important. It means that all of our senses and our movements are competing for space in our brain and so the way to think about the principle is anytime you're injured and you're hobbling along, you don't want to injure yourself further, but you want to try and compensate in the ways that respect this competition for neural real estate, and what that usually means is not relying on where you're still strong because that's just going to create runaway plasticity that's going to make it very hard for you to recover the motor function, and in some cases, the sensory function, of the damaged limb. Some of you may be wondering how long and how often one should restrict the activity of the intact or healthy limb, or limbs in some cases, and the answer is you don't have to do that all day, every day. These experiments centered on doing one or two hours of dedicated work, sensory motor work or, so for instance, if you had a sprained ankle on the left, you might spend part of the day where your left leg, provided it's not too painful, can be exercised, again, in a way that's not damaging to the injury, and the right limb can't contribute to that exercise. This might be peddling unilaterally on a stationary bike if you can do that. For a different type of limb injury, like an arm injury, this might be reaching, provided the shoulder is mobile, doing reaching. It might be even writing with the damaged side and then intentionally not writing with the preferred or undamaged side. This has been shown to accelerate the central plasticity and the recovery of function, which I think is what most people want when people are injured. They want to get back to doing what they were doing previously and they want to be able to do that without pain. This brings up another topic, which is definitely related to neuroplasticity and injury but is a more general one that I hear about a lot, which is traumatic brain injury. Many injuries are not just about the limb and the lack of use of the limb but concussion and head injury, and I want to emphasize I'm not a neurologist. I have many colleagues that are. At some point, we will do a whole month on TBI because it's such a serious issue and it's such a huge discussion, but I want to talk a little bit about what is known about recovery from concussion, and this is very important because it has implications for just normal aging as well and offsetting some of the cognitive decline and physical decline that occurs with normal aging. We shouldn't think of TBI as just for the football players or just for the kids that had an injury or just for the person that was in the car accident. We want to learn about TBI and understand TBI for those folks, but we're also going to talk about TBI as it relates to general degradation of brain function because there's a certain resemblance there of TBI to general brain aging. Typically after TBI, there are a number of different things that happen and there are a huge range of things that can create TBI. Neurologists and the emergency room physicians are going to want to know was the skull itself injured or did the brain rattle around in the skull? Was there actually a breach through the skull? Is there a physical object in there? How many concussions has the person had? Everyone's situation with TBI is incredibly different, but there's a constellation of symptoms that many people, if not all people with TBI, report which is headache, photophobia, that lights become aversive, sleep disruption, trouble concentrating, sometimes mood issues. There's a huge range and of course the severity will vary, et cetera. In a previous episode, I mentioned the Kennard Principle. The Kennard Principle, named after the famous neurologist, named by and after the famous neurologist Margaret Kennard, said that if you're going to get a brain injury, better to get it early in life than later in life and that's because the brain has a much greater or heightened capacity for repairing itself early in life than later, but of course, none of us want TBI and you can't pick when you get your TBI. You can avoid certain activities that would give you TBI, but really, when it comes to TBI, there are a couple of things that are agreed upon across the board. The first one is, as much as possible you want to avoid a second traumatic brain injury or concussion. That's going to be a tough one for some of the athletes and even recreational athletes to swallow because they want to continue in their sport, and I'm not here to tell you that you should or you shouldn't, but that's simply the way that it is. For folks that are in military or that are in certain professions, construction is a place where we see a lot of TBI. It's not always just football. A lot of construction workers are dealing with heavy objects swinging around in space. They wear those hardhat helmets, which unfortunately don't protect much against a lot of those blunt forces and certainly not against falls and things of that sort. Many people, in order to survive and feed their families, have to go back to work. It's very clear that regardless of whether or not there was a skull break and regardless of when the TBI happened and how many times it's happened, that the system that repairs the brain, the adult brain, is mainly centered around this lymphatic system that we call, for the brain, the glymphatic system. The brain wasn't thought to have a lymphatic system. It wasn't thought to have circulating immune cells, but about 10 years ago it was sort of rediscovered because if you look in the literature you realize this stuff was around longer, that there's a glymphatic system. It's sort of like a sewer system that clears out the debris that surrounds neurons, especially injured neurons, and the glymphatic system is very active during sleep. It's been imaged in functional magnetic resonance imaging and the glymphatic system is something that you want very active because it's going to clear away the debris that sits between the neurons, and the cells that surround the connections between the neurons, called the glia, those cells are actively involved in repairing the connections between neurons when damaged. The glymphatic system is so important that many people, if not all people who get TBI, are told, "Get adequate rest, you need to sleep," and that's kind of twofold advice. On the one hand, it's telling you to get sleep because all these good things happen in sleep. It's also about getting those people to not continue to engage in their activity full time or really try and hammer through it. You might say, "Well, if you have trouble sleeping, how are you supposed to get deep sleep?" Most of the activity of the glymphatic system, this wash out of the debris, is occurring during slow-wave sleep. Slow-wave sleep, as I mentioned in a previous episode, is something that happens typically in the early part of the evening. Even for those of you that are falling, or early part of the night, rather, if you're falling asleep and then waking up three, four hours later, it's important that you continue to get sleep but know that the slow-wave sleep is mainly packed toward the early part of the night, so that hopefully will alleviate some of the anxiety of the 3:00 and 4:00 am wake up, although you really should follow some of the protocols that I've suggested and your physician's protocols in order to try and get regular, longer sleep of seven, eight hours. Later, we're going to talk about the eight-hour mark as a prerequisite for repair. The glymphatic system has been shown to be activated further in two ways. One is that sleeping on one side, not on back or stomach, seems to increase the amount of wash out, or wash through, I should say, of the glymphatic system. There aren't a ton of data on this, but the data that exist are pretty solid. Again, sleeping on one side or with feet slightly elevated, as well, has been shown to increase the rate of clearance of some of the debris and that's because the way that the glymphatic system works is it has a physical pressure fluid dynamic to it that allow it to work more efficiently when one is sleeping on their side or with feet slightly elevated. This means not falling asleep in a chair while watching TV. This means, if possible, not falling asleep on one's back or on one's stomach, sleeping on one's side, and if you can't do that, I don't really like to sleep on my side. I sleep with my feet slightly elevated. I put a thin pillow under my ankles. I don't have TBI, but I have had a few concussions before, but right now I feel fine, but I find that putting the pillow under my ankles helps me sleep much more deeply and I wake up feeling much more refreshed. The other thing that has been shown to improve the function of the glymphatic system, and this is, again, is for sake of TBI as well as for everyone, even without brain injury, is a certain form of exercise, and I want to be very, very clear here. I will never and I am not suggesting that people exercise in any way that aggravates their injury or that goes against their physician's advice. Take your physician's advice as to whether or not you should be exercising at all and how much and then to what intensity. However, there's some interesting data, and we can provide a link to the review on this. It shows that exercise of what I guess people would nowadays call it Zone 2 cardio, which is low-level cardio that one could do while talking to somebody else. You could maintain a conversation, although you don't have to talk to somebody else. It just gives you a sense of the intensity of the exercise. That Zone 2 cardio for 30 to 45 minutes 3 times a week seems to improve the rates of clearance of some of the debris after injury, and in general, injury or no, to accelerate and improve the rates of flow for the glymphatic system. I find this really interesting because I think nowadays there's such an obsession with high-intensity interval training and people trying to pack in as much as they can into a short workout, which is great if it brings people to the table who haven't been exercising before, but I think it's really important that we know that the data on exercise and its relationship to brain health speak to doing 30 to 45 minutes of this what we call low-level cardio. It could be fast walking. It could be jogging if you can do that with your injury safely. It could be cycling. This is not the kind of workout that's designed to get your heart rate up to the point where you're improving your fitness levels at some sort of massive rate or taking huge jumps in your VO2 max or anything like that. This is exercise, I do this and I know a number of other people, especially people in communities where there is a lot of TBI, are now starting to adopt this, that the 30 to 45 minutes 3 times a week or so, could be more, of this Zone 2 type cardio can be very beneficial for washout of debris from the brain, and this is really interesting outside of TBI because what we know from aging is that aging is a nonlinear process. It's not like with every year of life your brain gets a little older. Sometimes it follows what's more like a step function where you get these big jumps in markers of aging. I guess that we could think of them as jumps down because it's a negative thing for most everybody. We'd like to live longer and be healthier in brain and body, and so the types of exercise I'm referring to now are really more about brain longevity and about keeping the brain healthy than they are about physical fitness. There's no reason why you couldn't do this and also, provided, again, it's safe for you given your brain state and injury state, et cetera, there's no reason why you couldn't also combine it with weight training and other forms of cardio. I think this is really interesting and if some of you would like to know the mechanism or at least the hypothesized mechanism, there's a molecule called aquaporin-4. It almost sounds like the fourth in a sequel of movies or something like that, but aquaporin-4 is a molecule that is related to the glial system. Glia are the, it means glue in Latin, are these cells in the brain, the most numerous cells in the brain, in fact, that ensheathe synapses, but they're very dynamic cells. They're like little ambulant cells. The microglia will run in and will gather up debris and soak it up and then run out after an injury. Aquaporin-4 is mainly expressed by the glial cell called the astrocyte. Astro, it looks like a little star. Incredibly interesting cells and the thing to remember is that the astrocytes bridge the connection between the neurons, the synapse, the connections between them, and the vasculature, the blood system, and the glymphatic system. They sit at the interface and they kind of, imagine somebody on an emergency site, car crash site, who's directing everybody around as to what to do. Get that person on a stretcher, bandage them up, call their mother, et cetera, et cetera, get this out of the road, put down some flares. The astrocytes work in that capacity as well as doing some things more directly. This glymphatic system and the glial astrocyte system is a system that we want chronically active throughout the day as much as possible, so low-level walking, Zone 2 cardio, and then at night, during slow-wave sleep, is then really when this glymphatic system kicks in. That should hopefully be an actionable takeaway, provided that you can do that kind of cardio safely, that I believe everybody should be doing who cares about brain longevity, not just people who are trying to get over TBI. Now I'd like to return a little bit to some of the subjective aspects of pain modulation because I think it's so interesting and so actionable that everyone should know about this, and in this case, we can also say that regardless of whether or not you're experiencing pain, acute or chronic, what I'm about to tell you is as close as anything is to proof, in science, we rarely talk about proof, we talk about evidence in favor or against a hypothesis, but as close as possible to proof that our interpretation, our subjective interpretation of a sensory event is immensely powerful for dictating our experience of the event. Here are a couple examples. First of all, anyone who's ever done combat sports or martial arts knows that it's incredible how little a punch hurts during a fight and it's incredible how much it hurts after a fight. The molecule adrenaline, when it's liberated into our body, truly blunts our experience of pain. We all know the stories of people walking miles on stumped legs, people doing all sorts of things that were incredible feats that allowed them to move through what would otherwise be pain, and afterward they do experience extreme pain, but during the event oftentimes they are not experiencing pain and that's because of the pain-blunting effects of adrenaline. I'll tell you exactly how this works in a few minutes when we talk about acupuncture, but norepinephrine binding to particular receptors, adrenaline binding to particular receptors actually shuts down pain pathways. People who anticipate an injection of morphine immediately report the feeling of loss of pain. Their pain starts to diminish because they know they're going to get pain relief and it's a powerful effect. All of you are probably saying placebo effect. Placebo effects are very real. Placebo effects and belief effects, as they're called, have a profound effect on our experience of noxious stimuli like pain and they can also have a profound effect on positive stimuli and things that we're looking forward to. One study that I think is particularly interesting here, it's from my colleague at Stanford, Sean Mackey. They did a neuroimaging study. They subjected people to pain. In this case, it was a heat pain. People have very specific thresholds to heat at which they cannot tolerate any more heat, but they explored the extent to which looking at an image of somebody, in this case, a romantic partner that the person loved, would allow them to adjust their pain response, and it turns out it does. If people are looking at an image or thinking about a person that they love, or even a thing that they love, a pet that they love, studies previous to the one that Mackey and colleagues did showed that their experience of pain was reduced. Their threshold for pain was higher. They could tolerate more pain and they reported it as not as painful, but there's a twist there which is it turns out that the extent to which love will modulate pain has everything to do with how infatuated and obsessed somebody is with the object of their love. People that report thinking about somebody, or a pet, for many hours of the day, kind of having an obsessive nature, almost like what people might call quote, unquote, codependency. For those of you that are listening, I'm just providing air quotes 'cause codependency is kind of a clinical thing now although it's thrown around a lot all the time. It's sort of like gaslighting. People talk about gaslighting all the time now. Gaslighting is a real thing but then people talked about gaslighting for many things outside the clinical description. If people are very obsessed with somebody, they have a kind of obsessive love of somebody's face, even if the other person doesn't know them, which is a little weird, that response, that feeling of love internally can blunt the pain experience to a significant degree. These are not small effects. It's not just that love can protect us from pain. It's that infatuation and obsession can protect us from pain, and not surprisingly, how early a relationship is, how new a relationship is directly correlates with people's ability, they showed, to use this love, this internal representation of love, to blunt the pain response. For those of you that have been with your partners for many years and you love them very much and you're obsessed with them, terrific. You have a pre-installed, well, I suppose it's not pre-installed. You had to do the work because relationships are work, but you've got a installed mechanism for blunting pain, and again, these are not minor effects. These are major effects and it's all going to be through that top-down modulation that we talked about, not unlike the mirror box experiments with phantom limb that relieve phantom pain or some other top-down modulation, and the opposite example was the nail through the boot, which is a visual image that made the person think it was painful when in fact it was painful even though there was no tissue damage. It was all perceptual. The pain system is really subject to these perceptual influences, which is remarkable because, really, when we think about the somatosensory system, it has this cognitive component, it's got this peripheral component, but there's another component which is the way in which our sensation, our somatosensory system is woven in with our autonomic nervous system, and we're going to get to that next, but I want to just raise the idea that the reason that this kind of infatuation and obsessive love can blunt the pain response and increase one's threshold for pain may have to do, I would say almost certainly has to do, but it hasn't been measured yet, with dopamine release because dopamine is absolutely the molecule that's liberated in our brain and body when there's a new kind of obsession or infatuation. It's very distinct from the kind of love chemicals, if you will, I don't even like calling them love chemicals. That just feels weird. If this were text, I would delete that line, but from the chemicals associated with warmth and connection, such as serotonin and oxytocin, which tend to be for more stable, long-lasting relationships. Dopamine is what dilates the pupils, which gets people really excited. They can't stop thinking about somebody. The text messages are even exciting. They write to them and they can't wait for the text message to come back, the dot dot dot on the screen. The text message is excruciating. They don't respond for two minutes and people are getting flipped out. I'm not here to support that kind of whatever, what I'm saying is that that obsessive type of love, which without question is going to be associated with the dopamine pathway, does seem to have a utility in the context of reducing the unpleasantness of physical pain, and probably has a lot to do with reducing the unpleasantness of a lot of life, like sitting in traffic, et cetera, because when we talk about pain, emotional pain and physical pain start to become one in the same. They are so closely intertwined that the lines between them neurally become very blurry. What do I mean by that? Well, if love and infatuation can reduce pain, presumably through the release of dopamine, well, then does dopamine release itself blunt pain? Should we be chasing dopamine release as a way to treat chronic and acute pain? And that's exactly what we're going to talk about now. Independent of love, we're going to talk about something quite different which is putting needles and electricity in different parts of the body, so-called acupuncture. Something that, for many people, it's been viewed as a kind of alternative medicine, but now there are excellent laboratories exploring what's called electroacupuncture and acupuncture. These are big university centers. In fact, my source for everything I'm about to tell you next is Professor Qiufu Ma at Harvard Medical School and his papers. I stand behind the information that I'm going to provide today, but it's extracted largely from the Ma lab's papers which use very rigorous variable-isolating experiments to address just how does something like acupuncture work, and I think what you'll be interested in and surprised to learn is that it does work, but sometimes it can exacerbate pain and sometimes it can relieve pain and it all does that through very discrete pathways for which we can really say, "This neuron connects to that neuron connects to the adrenals," and we can tie this all back to dopamine because in the end it's the chemicals and neural circuits that are giving rise to these perceptions, or these experiences, rather, of things that we call pain, love, et cetera. In a previous podcast episode, I mentioned my experience of visiting an acupuncturist and getting acupuncture. The acupuncture itself didn't really do that much for me, but I wasn't there for any specific reason. It was gifted to me by somebody and I wanted to try it. I'm not passing judgment on acupuncture. In fact, I know a number of people that really derive tremendous benefit from acupuncture for pain and for gastrointestinal issues. There are actually a lot of really good peer-reviewed studies supporting the use of acupuncture for, in particular, GI tract issues. In recent years, there's been an emphasis on trying to understand the mechanism of things like acupuncture and acupuncture itself, not to support acupuncture or to try to get everybody to do acupuncture but as a way to try and understand how these sorts of practices might actually benefit people who are experiencing pain or for changing the nervous system or brain-body relationship in general, and actually, the National Institutes of Health in the United States now has a entire subdivision, an institute within the National Institutes of Health, which is complementary health, and that institute is interested in things like acupuncture and a variety of other practices that, I think, 10, 15 years ago people probably thought were really alternative and maybe even counterculture, at least in the States, and it's exciting. I think people are starting to really take a look at what's going on under the hood for certain types of treatments that are very useful and I think it's very likely to lead to an expanded number of treatments for a number of different conditions. What I want to talk about in terms of acupuncture is the incredible way in which acupuncture illuminates the crosstalk between the somatosensory system, our ability to feel stuff externally, exteroception, internally, interoception, and how that somatosensory system is wired in with and communicating with our autonomic nervous system that regulates our levels of alertness or calmness. After that, I'm going to talk about how the acupuncture that's being done right now also points to relief for what's called referred pain. This takes us all back to the homunculus. Let's start there. We have this representation of our body surface in our brain. That representation is what we call somatotopic, and what somatotopy is is it just means that areas of your body that are near one another, so your thumb and your forefinger, for instance, are represented by neurons that are nearby each other in the brain. You might say, "Well, duh," but actually, it didn't have to be that way. The neurons that represent the tip of my forefinger and the neurons that represent my thumb on the same hand could have been distantly located and therefore the map of my body surface, the homunculus, would be really disordered, but it's not that way. It's very ordered. It's very smooth. As, let's say you were to image my brain, if you were to stimulate my finger, my forefinger, and then march that stimulation across my finger, across the palm and to the nearby thumb, you would see that neurons in the brain would also make a sort of J shape in their pattern of activation. That means there's so-called somatotopy, but the connections from those brain neurons are sent into the body and they are synchronized with, meaning they cross-wire with and form synapses with some of the input from the viscera, from our guts, from our diaphragm, from our stomach, from our spleen, from our heart. Our internal organs are sending information up to this map in our brain of the body surface, but it's about internal information, what we call interoception, our ability to look inside or imagine inside and feel what we're feeling inside. The way to think about this accurately is that our representation of ourself is a representation of our internal workings, our viscera, our guts, everything inside our skin, and the surface of our skin, and the external world, what we're seeing. Those three things are always being combined in a very interesting, complex but very seamless way. Acupuncture involves taking needles, and sometimes electricity and or heat as well, and stimulating particular locations on the body and through these maps of stimulation that have been developed over thousands of years, mostly in Asia, but now this is a practice that's being done many places throughout the world, they have these maps that speak to, oh, well, if you stimulate this part of the body, you get this response, and if somebody has a gastrointestinal issue, like their guts are moving too quick, they have diarrhea, you stimulate this area and it'll slow their gut motility down, or if their gut motility is too slow, they're constipated, you stimulate someplace else and it accelerates it, and hearing about this stuff, it sounds kind of, to a Westerner who's not thinking about the underlying neural circuitry, it could sound kind of wacky. It really sounds like alternative or even really out there stuff, but when you look at the neural circuitry, the neuroanatomy, it really starts to make sense, and Qiufu Ma's lab at Harvard Medical School is an excellent laboratory, has been exploring how stimulation of different types, intense or weak, with heat or without heat, on different parts of the body can modulate pain and inflammation, and what they've shown in a particularly exciting study is that stimulation of the abdomen, anywhere on the midsection, weakly does nothing. "Well, that's not very interesting," you might say. Intense stimulation of the abdomen, however, with this electroacupuncture has a very strong effect of increasing inflammation in the body, and this is important to understand because it's not just that stimulating the gut does this because you're activating the gut area. It activates a particular nerve pathway. For the aficionados, it's the splenic spinal sympathetic axis if you really want to know, and it's pro-inflammatory under most conditions. However, there are other conditions where if, for instance, the person is dealing with a particular bacterial infection, that can be beneficial, and this goes back to a much earlier discussion that we had on a previous podcast that we'll revisit again and again, which is that the stress response was designed to combat infection. It turns out that there are certain patterns of stimulation on the abdomen that can actually liberate immune cells from our immune organs, like our spleen, and counter infection through the release of things like adrenaline. Qiufu's lab also showed that stimulation of the feet and hands can reduce inflammation, and again, this was done mechanistically. This was done by blocking certain pathways with the appropriate control experiments. This was done not in any kind of subjective way. This was also done by measuring particular molecules, IL-6 and cytokines and things that are related to the inflammation response, and what they showed is that the stimulation of the, in particular, the hind limbs at low intensity led to increases in the activity of this vagal pathway. The vagus nerve being this 10th cranial nerve that serves the rest and digest and parasympathetic, in other words, calming response. What this means is that we are now at the front edge of this research field that's, it's early days still, but it's discovering that depending on whether or not the stimulation is intense or mild and depending on where the stimulation is done on the body you can get very different effects. This points to the idea that you can't say acupuncture good or acupuncture bad. There has to be a systematic understanding of what exactly the effect is that you're trying to achieve and the underlying basis for this is really relevant to the thing about adrenaline that I said before, that in a fight, it's rare that you ever feel pain when you get hit, I've experienced that, but later it hurts a lot. It turns out that when you stimulate these pathways that activate, in particular, the adrenals, the adrenal gland liberates norepinephrine and epinephrine and the brain does as well, it binds to what are called the beta noradrenergic receptors. This is really getting down into the weeds, but the beta noradrenergic receptors activate the spleen which liberates cells that combat infection and it's anti-inflammatory. That's the short-term quick response. The more intense stimulation of the abdomen and other areas can be pro-inflammatory because of the ways that they trigger certain loops that go back to the brain and trigger the anxiety pathways and that place people into a state of anxiety that exacerbates pain. One pathway stimulates norepinephrine and blunts pain, the other one doesn't. What does all this mean? How are we supposed to put all of this together? Well, there's a paper that was published in "Nature Medicine" in 2014, this is an excellent journal, that describes how dopamine can activate the vagus peripherally in the, not dopamine in the brain, peripherally, and norepinephrine can activate the vagus peripherally and reduce inflammation, and I'm not trying to throw a ton of facts at you. You'll say, "Well, what am I supposed to do with all this information?" What this means is that there are real maps of our body surface that when stimulated communicate with our autonomic nervous system, the system that controls alertness or calmness, and thereby releases either molecules like norepinephrine and dopamine, which make us more alert, as we would be in a fight, and blunt our response to pain and they reduce inflammation, but there are yet other pathways that when stimulated are pro-inflammatory, and that brings us to the question of what is all this inflammation stuff that people are talking about? One of the things that bothers me so much these days, and I'm not easily irritated, but what really bothers me is when people are talking about inflammation like inflammation is bad. Inflammation is terrific. Inflammation is the reason why cells are called to the site of injury to clear it out. Inflammation is what's going to allow you to heal from any injury. Chronic inflammation is bad, but acute inflammation is absolutely essential. Remember those kids that we talked about earlier that have mutations in these receptors for sensing pain? They never get inflammation and that's why their joints literally disintegrate. It's really horrible because they don't actually have the inflammation response because it was never triggered by the pain response. Inflammation can be very beneficial. There's a lot of interest nowadays in taking things and doing things to limit inflammation. One of the ones that comes up a lot is turmeric. I'm sure the moment anyone starts talking about inflammation the question is, "What about turmeric?" I have talked before about turmeric elsewhere. I am very skeptical of turmeric and I might lose a few friends, although that'd be weird if my friend, that would say something about my friendships if I lost friends over a discussion about turmeric, but in any case, turmeric does have anti-inflammatory properties, there's no question about that, but as we've just described, inflammation can be a very good thing, at least in the short term. The other thing about turmeric is there was a study published out of Stanford in collection with some work from other universities showing that a lot of turmeric is heavily contaminated with lead. The lead is used to get that really rich, dense, orange coloring to it that everyone wants to see, so you have to check your sources of turmeric. The other thing is, for men in particular, turmeric can be very antagonistic to dihydrotestosterone. Dihydrotestosterone is the more dominant form of androgen in human males and it's involved in things like aggression and libido and things of that sort. Many people that I've talked to who have have taken turmeric get a severe blunting of affect and libido. For some people that might be a serious negative. I certainly avoid turmeric. I don't like turmeric for that reason. I also think that the inflammation response is a healthy response. You have to keep it in check and we're going to talk about specific practices for wound healing and injury in a moment, but this idea that just inflammation is bad and you want to reduce inflammation across the board, nothing could be further from the truth. We have pathways that exist in our body specifically to increase inflammation. It's the inflammation that goes unchecked, just like stress, which is problematic for repair, for brain injury, and it can exacerbate certain forms of dementia, et cetera, but I'd like to create a little bit more nuance or a lot more nuance, if possible, in the conversation around inflammation because people have just taken this discussion around inflammation to be this idea that just inflammation is bad and nothing could be further from the truth. Before I continue, I just thought I'd answer a question that I get a lot which is what about Wim Hof breathing? I get asked about this a lot. Wim Hof, also called aka The Iceman, has this breathing that's similar to Tummo breathing, as it was originally called, involves basically hyperventilating and then doing some exhales and some breath holds. A couple of things about that. It should never be done near water. People who have done it near water unfortunately have drowned. It's certainly not for everybody and I'm not here to either promote it nor discourage people from doing it, but I think we should ask ourselves, "What is the net effect of that?" Because a number of people have asked me about it in relation to pain management. The effect of doing that kind of breathing, it's not a mysterious effect. It liberates adrenaline from the adrenals. There is a paper published in the "Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences," which is a very fine journal, showing that that breathing pattern can counter infection from endotoxin and that's because when you have adrenaline in your system and when the spleen is very active, that response is used to counter infection and stress counters infection. We'll talk about this more going forward, but the idea that stress lends itself to infection is false. Stress counters infection by liberating killer cells in the body. You don't want the stress response to stay on indefinitely, however. Things like Wim Hof breathing, like ice baths, anything that releases adrenaline will counter the infection, but you want to regulate the duration of that adrenaline response. This should make perfect sense. We, as a species, had to evolve under conditions of famine and cold. Actually, Texas right now is an extreme case of cold and power outage. I've seen the pictures and a lot of people out there are really suffering. Their systems are releasing a ton of adrenaline. They're cold. Some of them are likely to be hungry. They're probably stressed. They're releasing a lot of adrenaline which is keeping them safe from infection. After they get their heat back on and they relax and they can finally warm up again, which we would like for them very soon, hopefully by the time this podcast comes out, that will have already happened, that's typically when people get sick because the immune response is blunted as the stress response starts to subside. Stress, inflammation, countering infection, that comes from endotoxin, that comes from any number of things. It can be from cold. It can be from hyperventilation. It can be from a physical threat. It can be from the stress of an exam or an upcoming surgery. This adrenaline thing and the inflammation associated with it is adaptive. It's highly adaptive. It is a short-term plasticity that is designed to make us better for what we're experiencing and challenged with, not worse, and so hopefully that will add an additional layer to this whole idea that stress is bad, inflammation is bad, et cetera. Again, I'm not suggesting people do or don't do something like Wim Hof, Tummo breathing, I just want to point to the utility. It's very similar to the utility from cold showers, ice baths and other forms of anything that increase adrenaline. Every episode, I want to make sure that every listener comes away with as much knowledge as possible but also actionable tools, and today we've talked about a variety of tools, but I want to center in on a particular sequence of tools that hopefully you won't need, but presumably if you're a human being and you're active, you will need at some point. It's about managing injury and recovering and healing fast or at least as fast as possible. It includes removing the pain. It includes getting mobility back and getting back to a normal life, whatever that means for you. I want to emphasize that what I'm about to talk about next was developed in close consultation with Kelly Starrett, who many of you probably have heard of before. Kelly can be found at The Ready State. He's a formally trained, so degreed and educated, exercise physiologist. He's a world expert in movement and tissue rehabilitation, et cetera. They're not sponsors of the podcast. Kelly is a friend and a colleague. He's somebody that I personally trust and his views on tissue rehabilitation and injury I think are really grounded extremely well in both medicine, physiology, and the real cutting edge of what's new and what you might not get in terms of advice from the typical person. All that said, you always, always, always should consult with your physician before adopting any protocols or removing any protocols. I asked Kelly, I made it really simple, I said, "Okay, let's say I were to sprain my ankle or break my arm or injure my knee or ACL tear or something like that or shoulder injury, what are the absolute necessary things to do regardless of situation and what science is this grounded in?" And then I made it a point to go find the studies that either supported or refuted what he was telling me because that's why I'm here. The first one is a very basic one, that now you have a lot of information to act on, which is in terms of what we know about tissue rehabilitation, both brain and body, we know that sleep is essential, and so we both agreed that eight hours minimum in bed per night is critical. What was interesting, however, is that it doesn't have to be eight hours of sleep. We acknowledged that some of that time might be challenging to get to sleep, especially if one is in pain or mobility is limited. We forget how often we roll over in bed or how the conditions of our sleeping can impact those injuries too. Kelly acknowledged, and I agree, that eight hours of sleep would be ideal, but if not, at least eight hours immobile and that speaks to the power of these non-sleep deep rest protocols too. If you can't sleep, doing non-sleep deep rest protocols, we've provided links to them before, we're going to continue to provide links to the previous ones and new ones are coming soon, that is extremely beneficial. That's a non-negotiable in terms of getting the foundation for allowing for glymphatic clearance and tissue clearance, et cetera. The other is, if possible, unless it's absolutely excruciating or you just can't do it, a 10-minute walk per day, of course you don't want to exacerbate the injury, at least a 10-minute walk per day and probably longer. This is where it gets interesting. I was taught, I learned that when you injure yourself, you're supposed to ice something. You're supposed to put ice on it, but I didn't realize this, but when speaking to exercise physiologists and some physicians, they said that the ice is really more of a placebo. It numbs the environment of the injury, which is not surprising, and will eliminate the pain for a short while, but it has some negative effects that perhaps offset its use. One, it sludges, it creates sludging within the blood and other lymphatic tissue, so it actually can create some clotting and sludging of the tissue and fluids, the fascial interface with muscle, and a number of the stuff that's supposed to be flowing through there can slow up and increase inflammation in the wrong way, can actually restrict movement out of the injury site, which is bad because you want the macrophages and the other cell types phagocytosing, eating up, the debris in an injury and moving it out of there so that it can repair. That was surprising to me which made me ask, "Well, then what about heat?" Well, it turns out heat is actually quite beneficial. A lot of people talk about heat shock proteins and all these genetic pathways and protein pathways that can be activated by heat. Very little data to support the idea that heat shock proteins are part of the wound healing process, at least in terms of the sorts of conventional heat that one could use like a hot water bottle or a hot bath or a hot compress. The major effects seem to be explained by heat improving the viscosity of the tissues and the clearance and the perfusion of fluid, blood, lymph and other fluids, out of the injury area. That's really interesting. I didn't know this. I thought, well, you're supposed to ice something. I said, well, whenever I would see a kid get injured in soccer, never me, of course, no, of course I got injured in soccer from time to time, they give you an ice pack and the ice pack removes some of the pain. I think the consensus now, which was surprising to me, is that the ice pack is actually more of the top-down modulation. You think you're doing something for the pain and there's some interesting studies that actually showed the placebo effect of the ice pack, so ice packs are placebo, perhaps. That's interesting. I'll underline perhaps because who knows? Maybe there's some people out there that are going to say this is totally crazy and the ice is actually very beneficial, but it seems like heat, mobility, sleep, keeping movement, and it turns out that the movement itself can act as a bit of an analgesic, it can actually reduce the pain, whereas the ice reduces the pain but sludges the tissue and keeps the cells that need to be removed from leaving the area. What's also interesting is in neuroscience we know that if we want to kill neurons or silence neurons, we cool them. This is a well-known tool in the laboratory. Some of the early and most important studies in neuroscience that formed the basis for the textbooks were lowering a cooling probe into a particular area of the brain or a peripheral nerve in order to shut down that nerve, so the cooling will shut down the nerve, but another very well-known fact in neuroscience text books is that when the activity of the nerve pathway or neurons comes back, there's what's called homeostatic plasticity, that it rebounds with greater pain, with a higher level of intensity, which in the pain system would equate to greater pain. Regardless of where these neurons are in the body, if you stimulate a neuron, it's active. If you cool it, it becomes inactive and when the neuron heats back up after being cooled, it becomes hyperactive, and so this makes really good sense as to why heat, provided it's not damaging levels of heat, would be more beneficial for wound healing and for reducing pain in the short and long run than would be cold or ice, which I find very interesting. In terms of chronic pain, the manuscripts on this, my discussion with Kelly and with others, point to the fact that chronic pain is basically plasticity gone wrong. It's sort of like PTSD for the emotional system and the stress system, and chronic pain is going to involve a number of different protocols to rewire both the brain centers and the peripheral centers associated with chronic pain. Certain things like fibromyalgia, for instance, which is whole-body pain, relate to too little inhibition. In the brain, you have excitation and inhibition. They come from different sources of neurons. The inhibition is mainly from GABA and glycine and things like that. In fibromyalgia, there's too little central, within the brain, modulation of the pain responses so that people experience whole-body pain. In that case, the emerging therapies are really interesting. I have a friend who works for the National Institutes of Health who unfortunately suffers from fibromyalgia who asked me about this a lot and his question and what he's now actually exploring is red light therapy. Something that I've talked about on various Instagram posts. Red light therapy typically is talked about in terms of mitochondria and the data on that are not so terrific, at least not really published in blue ribbon journals in most cases, except for one study that I'm aware of from Glen Jeffery's lab at University College London showing that red light stimulation to the eyes in people 40 or older can offset some of the effects of macular degeneration by improving the health of the photo receptors. People with fibromyalgia, which is this whole-body pain, are now starting to use red light therapies. When I asked Kelly and others and some experts in pain, "What are your thoughts on this red light therapy for things like fibromyalgia and pain, especially red light local therapy?" Their idea, and I don't think this is a field that's progressed far enough now to really place any firm conclusions on, but the idea is that red light therapy locally may have some effect, but the systemic red light therapy, this is like wearing protection to the eyes, in some cases, so not for the treatment of macular degeneration but wearing protection of the eyes and getting very bright red light therapy in many ways may be, and to use Kelly's words, "Approximating the effects of nature." These are like surrogate technologies for getting outside in the sunshine. When you're in the sun, it might not look red, but there are a lot of red wavelengths coming toward you. The red light therapies may have some utility, but getting into sunlight may actually have as much or more effect. Of course, if these wounds are on a part of the body that you can't expose, then you could imagine why the red light therapy might be good. I don't know, depending on the neighborhood you live in, that may or may not be a weird thing to go outside and expose your body to sunlight. Probably a number of factors that dictate whether or not that'd be weird or not, but that's up to you, not me, and it seems that, so movement, heat, not ice, light, sleep, and in some cases, the use, and I'll talk about this in a moment, that some cases the use of restricting above and below the injury to then release and then increase perfusion through the site may actually accelerate the wound healing. All of this might sound just like common sense knowledge, but to me, at least as a 45-year-old, I always just thought it's ice, it's non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs, it's things that block prostaglandins, so things like aspirin, ibuprofen, acetaminophen. Those things generally work by blocking things, they're called the COX prostaglandin blockers and things of that sort, things in that pathway. Those sorts of treatments which reduce inflammation may not be so great at the beginning when you want inflammation, they may be important for limiting pain so people can be functional at all, but the things that I talked about today really are anchored in three principles. One is that the inflammation response is a good one. This is what we're learning from Qiufu Ma's lab's work on acupuncture. The immediate acute inflammation response is good. It calls to the site of injury things that are going to clean up the injury and bad cells. Then there are going to be things that are going to improve perfusion, like the glymphatic system, getting deep sleep, feet elevated, sleeping on one side, low-level Zone 2 cardio three times a week. Red light, perhaps, is going to be useful although sunlight might be just as good depending on who you talk to, and we can talk about that probably more at length in a future episode. A number of people will ask me, I'm sure, about stem cells and I don't want to take more of your time by going into an hour-long discussion about stem cells. Stem cells exist in all of us during development. We were created from stem cells, which are cells that can become essentially anything. Later, cells get what's called restricted in their lineage, so a skin cell, unless you do some fancy molecular gymnastics to it, you can't actually turn that cell into a neuron. Yamanaka won the Nobel Prize for finding these Yamanaka factors which you could give a skin cell to turn into a neuron, but that's not an approved therapy at this time, but many people ask me about platelet-rich plasma, so-called PRP. They take blood, they enrich for platelets, and they re-inject it back into people. Here's the deal. This deserves an entire episode. It has never been shown whether or not the injection itself is what's actually creating the effect. This is something that the acupuncture literature suffered from for a long time, that the sham control, as it's called, sham, we don't mean it's a sham, but in science you say a sham control meaning you do everything exactly the same way you would. So for acupuncture, you would bring the needle right up to the skin, but you wouldn't actually poke it into the skin, for instance. That would be a sham control. With a drug treatment, you would inject a drug into a person and then the control, the sham control, would be that you would bring the injection over, you might do the injection or not do the injection 'cause you imagine that the injection itself could have an effect. It's never really been shown whether or not PRP has effects that are separate from injecting a volume of fluid into a tissue. The claims that PRP actually contains stem cells are very, very feeble, and when you look at the literature and you talk to anyone expert in the stem cell field, they will tell you that it's, the number of stem cells in PRP is infinitesimally small. In fact, so much so that these places that inject PRP for injuries are not allowed to advertise through the use of the words stem cells. It's actually illegal at this point, at least as far as I know. It was through the end of last year and I'm guessing it still is now. Stem cells are an exciting area of technology. However, there's a clinic down in Florida that was shut down a couple of years ago for injecting stem cells harvested from patients into the eye for macular degeneration. These were people that were suffering from poor vision and very shortly after injecting the stem cells into the eyes, they went completely blind. I'm somebody who is very skeptical of the stem cell treatment work that's out there. It's actually very hard to get in the United States for this reason. It's not approved. The PRP treatments are very complicated. The marketing around them is shaky at best. I'm sure a number of people will say that they had PRP and benefited from it tremendously and I don't doubt that. Whether or not it was placebo, today we talked a lot about top-down control, that's just a variant on the word placebo, belief effects, whether or not it was placebo or not, I don't know. I wasn't there. That's for you to decide and I'm not here to tell you that you should or shouldn't do something, but I do think that anything involving stem cells, one should be very cautious of. You should also be very cautious of anyone that tells you that PRP is injecting a lot of stem cells. This is an evolving area that really needs a lot more work and attention. The major issue with stem cells that I think is concerning is that stem cells are cells that want to become lots of different things, not just the tissue that you're interested in. If you damage your knee and you inject stem cells into your knee, you need to molecularly restrict those stem cells so that they don't become tumor cells. A tumor is a collection of stem cells. When you get something horrible like glioblastoma in the brain, which is a terrible thing to have, it's glial cells that returned to stemness, excessive stemness, they've started to produce too many of themselves, and glioblastoma is often deadly, not always. Injecting stem cells, it sounds great, and it sounds like something that one would want to do, but one needs to approach this with extreme caution, even if it's your own blood or stem cells that you're re-injecting. I think those technologies are coming. They're on the way. If any of you are devotees of PRP, tell me your experiences with them. I'm curious. I want to see the papers. I want to know the evidence, and of course, there are always folks out there that say, "I don't care what the scientists and the physicians and the FDA say. I just want to do this," and if that's your stance, that's your stance. I'm not here to govern that, but I do think that people should be informed, and in thinking about tissue recovery and injury, that's what I was able to glean. Again, check out what Kelly and his coworkers are doing at The Ready State. It's phenomenal and they've worked with all the top people in just about every domain of life, it seems. Very high-integrity folks. Some of you are probably saying, "Well, I'm not injured. I'm not an athlete. I don't want stem cell injections. I don't have," again, I'm saying you shouldn't get stem cell injections for now. Please hold off until the field learns more about how to do that safely, but I want to talk about and end with a really interesting and somewhat weird technology, which is baby blood. I have a colleague at Stanford, his name is Tony Wyss-Coray, and in 2014 his laboratory published a study showing that the blood of young rodents, mice and rats, when transfused into old, demented rodents, mice and rats, made those old, demented rodents recover much of their memory and seem much more vital and energetic, better recall of different spatial learning tasks. Tissue and wound healing, they've since shown, can be improved in these older animals. It's pretty incredible. They went on to show several years later that blood from umbilical cords, I'm not making this up, blood from umbilical cords can do the same and this is the basis of a biotech company. Actually, one of my former postdocs is now an employee there. They've isolated the molecules from young blood that seems to vitalize or revitalize the old brain and body, and one of those molecules goes by the name TIMP2. T-I-M-P-2. Where's all this going? Well, I don't know how long it's going to be before there are treatments based on these blood transfusions. I doubt that blood transfusions themselves from young people into old people is going to be used for the treatment of dementia, although it might, as weird as it seems. We know that transfusions of all sorts of stuff, for instance, fecal transplants are being used to treat obesity. The gut microbiome of thin people is being, not transfused, but is being transplanted into the colons and guts of obese people and leading to weight loss, which sounds really wild and is not a topic I particularly enjoy talking about, but nonetheless, it points to the importance of the gut microbiome in regulating things like blood sugar and health as it relates to obesity and diabetes and all sorts of things. It does appear that there are things, factors in the blood of young members of a given species that are lost over time in the older members of that species. I'm not going to give you a tool on the basis of these findings today. I am not going to tell you to consume any fluid from any other member of your species, our species, for any reason, but I do think that it's important to mention that the science is asking questions such as what are the factors within the brain that allow the young brain to recover so much better than the older brain from injury, from all sorts of things, events, et cetera, and what are the factors in the older brain that are limiting, and thinking about identifying which factors are going to allow people to restore cognitive function, physical function, wound healing and so forth. It's a really exciting area. I mention it not to be sensationalist but because it's happening and because there's a lot of excitement about it and because I think it's clear that the young brain and body and blood are very different from the old brain, body and blood, and the goal of science is to identify and isolate those factors that make that so, such that people who would otherwise get dementia or perhaps even have dementia will be allowed to recover. Again, not an actionable item at this point, but one to think about, perhaps not too long, but one to think about. I'm going to close there. I've talked about a lot of tools today. I've talked a lot about somatosensation, about plasticity, about pain, about acupuncture, some of the nuance of acupuncture, inflammation and stress. We even talked a little bit about high-intensity breathing, talked about restricting limb movement to get compensatory regrowth of pathways, or I should say reactivation of pathways that have been injured or damaged. As always, we take a whirlwind tour through a given topic, lay down some tools as we go. Hopefully the principles that relate to pain and injury but also neuroplasticity in general, today in the context of the somatosensory system, will be of use to all of you. I don't wish injury on any of you, but I do hope that you'll take this information to mind and that you will think about it if ever you find yourself in a situation where you have to ask what's the difference between my perception and the actual tissue damage? Is injury and pain, is it the same? Well, no. Do I have some control over my experience of pain? Absolutely. Does all of that involve taking drugs or doing certain therapeutics? No, not necessarily. There's the incredible subjective component. There also is a need sometimes to treat the injury at the level of the pain receptors at the site of the wound, so please take the information, do with it what you will, and in the meantime, thank you so much for your time and attention. Before we go, I just want to remind you to please subscribe to the YouTube channel, Apple and or Spotify. Leave us comments and feedback. Five star review on Apple if you think we deserve that. Please check out our sponsors. Check out our Patreon, patreon.com/andrewhuberman, and as well, if you're interested in the supplements that I take and you want to try any of those, you can go to Thorne, thorne.com/u/huberman and you'll get 20% off any of the supplements listed there as well as any others on the Thorne site. Once again, thanks so much for your time and attention today, and as always, thank you for your interest in science. [relaxing rock music]

========================================

--- Video 341 ---
Video ID: uuP-1ioh4LY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uuP-1ioh4LY
Title: Optimize Your Learning & Creativity With Science-Based Tools
Published: 2021-02-22 13:00:15 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I describe how to access focused learning bouts, creative states, and the underlying neural circuitry involved. I frame this in the context of our daily 24-hour cycle in order to make it practical, clear and precise about timing. I review the role of fasting, meal timing and specific types of nutrients for promoting certain states of mind. I also review various other tools and biological factors that directly or indirectly gate brain function and that we can control. I answer commonly asked questions about the science of psychedelics, binaural beats, and visualization. Thank you for your interest in science!

For an updated list of our current sponsors, please visit our website as previous sponsors mentioned in this podcast episode may no longer be affiliated with us: https://hubermanlab.com/sponsors

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

Links I mention:
Spike Jonze/Kenzo Perfume: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NoMqvniiEkk
Dr. Charles Czeisler, MD, PhD: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Czeisler
Reveri Health (Free) Research Supported Hypnosis: https://reverihealth.com/
The NSDR I do every day (30 min): https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iEw5BkK9K9A&t=15s

Timestamps below.
00:00 Introduction 
04:53 The Daily (Learning) Routine
07:13 Plasticity Is NOT the Goal
09:26 No Obligation To Change
09:59 Practical Plasticity Language 
13:37 Pillars of Neuroplasticity
15:16 My Daily Routine: Chronotype Management
17:20 Plasticity of the Wake-Sleep Circuit: Morning Light
19:09 Delay Caffeine! 
21:19 Light, Black Coffee, Hydrate
22:57 High Alertness, Linear Tasks/Learning
25:12 Background Music/Noise: Yay or Nay?
26:52 “GO” versus “NO-GO”: The Basal Ganglia & Dopamine
28:37 Leveraging GO, NO-GO
30:08 Non-Specific Action 
32:06 Clear, Calm, Focused: The GO, NO-GO Sweet Spot
33:48 When Very Alert, Work In Silence; When Tired, Include Background Noise
35:28 Temperaments Vary: And So Should This
36:01 The 3 Hour-Long Post Waking Block
36:20 Early Morning Exercise and GO Networks
38:05 Fasting, Ketogenic Diets, & Food Volume 
39:41 Sodium/Electrolytes 
40:57 Avoiding Hot Lunch, Food Pre-Occupation
42:01 Post Lunch Low/No Cognitive Load
42:56 Hydration, NSDR, Nap 
44:54 Creativity Work
46:26 Creativity Is A Two-Part Phenomenon
51:15 Psychedelics
58:20 Afternoon Light As Insurance 
1:00:26 Evening Nutrition 
1:01:21 Repacking Glycogen: Hormonal Factors
1:04:11 Pre-Sleep Anxiety: Normal and Easy To Solve 
1:07:08 The Power of Objective Tools
1:08:14 Visualization
1:11:34 Mini-Synthesis 
1:13:31 Resetting Your Clock 
1:15:55 Don’t Trust the Mind Now
1:16:59 Two, (Maybe 3) Optimization Bouts Per Day
1:18:33 Organizational Logic 
1:20:22 Wim Hof Breathing, Binaural Beats, Ice Baths, Etc.
1:24:42 Variation Among People, and Dogs 
1:25:49 Accurate Versus Exhaustive
1:27:57 Familiar and New Ways To Support

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English (United States)
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast where we discuss science, and science-based tools for everyday life. - My name is Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology, at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring you zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools. And keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. InsideTracker analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and health and health needs. I've been getting my blood tested for many years now. Because, it just turns out that many of the things that are important to our health and wellbeing can only be detected in a blood test or a DNA test. InsideTracker makes that really easy. They can come to your house to take those samples if you like, or you can go to a nearby clinic as well. The major problem with most blood tests and DNA tests is that it's very hard to make sense of the information you get. You get a lot of numbers related to metabolic factors, endocrine factors, et cetera. InsideTracker makes it very easy, to decipher what those levels, in your blood and DNA mean, and what to do about them. They have a very easy to use dashboard that if you go to it, it can inform about lifestyle choices such as, adding or subtracting certain forms of exercise or nutrition, other things related to supplementation. It's a really powerful and easy to use program. If you wanna try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman, and put Huberman at checkout to get 25% off any of their programs. That's insidetracker.com/huberman, and put Huberman at checkout. The second sponsor of today's podcast is Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one, vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I've been using Athletic Greens since 2012. And so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. I started using Athletic Greens and I still use Athletic Greens, because I find it very complicated and almost dizzying to figure out which vitamins and minerals I need to take in order to just cover my nutritional basis. Taking Athletic Greens makes that very easy. It also tastes very good. I mix mine with water, a little bit of lemon juice, and I really like it. So I drink it once or twice a day. The probiotics that are in Athletic Greens are also important to me. Because there are a lot of data now showing that the gut microbiome, which is supported by probiotics, is important for things like the gut brain access, mood, endocrine factors, metabolism, many, many biological functions. And so by taking Athletic Greens, I get the vitamins, the minerals and the probiotics all in one. Easy to consume, great tasting drink. If you wanna try Athletic Greens you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman. And if you do that you'll also get, a one year supply of liquid vitamin D three K two. There are a lot of data now as well, showing that vitamin D three is important for immune function, for mood, endocrine factors, as well as other systems in the brain and body. That's athleticgreens.com/huberman. And I should also mention if you do that you won't just get the vitamin D three K two year supply, you'll also get five free travel packs of Athletic Greens. Mixing up powders when one is on the road, either in the car or in a hotel or on the plane, et cetera, can be kinda messy. These little travel packs make it really clean and easy. So once again, if you go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, you'll get a special offer, of your Athletic Greens but you'll also get the year supply of vitamin D3 K2, and the five free travel packs. The third sponsor of today's podcast is Madefor. Madefor is a behavioral science company that makes attaining positive changes and growth mindset easy, through a simple set of steps, and a monthly program. The company was founded by former Navy SEAL Patrick Dossett and Toms founder, Blake Mycoskie. I'm the head of their scientific advisory board. And the other members of the advisory board, include people like the director of the chronobiology unit the National Institute of Mental Health, members of Harvard Medical School, and many other people who are serious about taking science and developing protocols, that can be applied towards positive habits, and growth mindset. If you wanna check out Madefor, you can go to getmadefor.com. And if you purchase any of their products and put Huberman at checkout, you'll get 20% off their program. In addition to that, we do a monthly Zoom call, where the members of Madefor get on it. And Patrick and myself, sometimes Blake as well, discuss the Madefor program and the personal goals and things that people are trying to achieve with the program. So it's a dialogue back and forth on Zoom call once a month. Once again, that's getmadefor.com, put in Huberman at checkout, and you'll be able to get the 20% off as well as access to the monthly Zoom calls with us. Let's talk about neuroplasticity. More specifically, let's talk about how, we can optimize our brains. Neuroplasticity is this incredible feature of our nervous system that allows it to change itself, even in ways that we consciously decide. That's an incredible property. Our liver can't decide to just change itself. Our spleen can't decide to just change itself, through conscious thought, or through feedback from another person. The cells in those tissues can make changes sure, but it's our nervous system, that harbors this incredible ability to direct its own changes, in ways that we believe, or we're told will serve us better. Now, today's a really special episode because, while we are going to talk about science and as always we will delve into mechanism. Today's episode is really geared toward answering your most common questions about how to leverage neuroplasticity. The previous episodes were about focus, and how to achieve focus for sake of plasticity. As well as the last episode which is, what are some of the portals into plasticity that relate to movement, how behavior can activate plasticity, as well as how to activate plasticity for behavior itself. How to get better at learning certain movements. Today's podcast is really directed toward answering your most common questions, and the bigger theme, of how does one go about optimizing their brain or even think about, optimizing the brain? What is this thing that we're calling optimizing the brain? In doing so I'm also gonna share some of my, typical routines and tools. I don't share these because I think that they are the only ones that are available out there. Certainly they're not. Nor do I share them because I think that everyone should do them just 'cause I do them, certainly not. I share them because many of you, have asked for very concrete examples of what I do and when, and so I'll share those with you and you can decide whether or not those protocols are for you or not. Everybody's different, but there are some common features, of how we are all put together, at the level of the nervous system and body, that direct us toward particular practices, particular routines that can be especially powerful, for neuroplasticity. So I wanna open up the discussion today, by emphasizing something, that's fundamentally important. Which is that plasticity, is not the goal. Plasticity is never the goal. Plasticity is simply a state, or a capacity, for our nervous system to change. And so, nothing makes me more frustrated, perhaps then when I hear, oh, you know, this pill, this potion, this practice, it gives you plasticity. Plasticity is just change. The real question is what are you trying to change? And specifically what end goal are you trying to achieve? Specific end goals might be extremely specific. Like, you want to learn how to speak a particular language or you want to learn a new motor skill or you want to get very good at calculus, or you'd like to forget the bad emotions related to a particular human being or experience, or it can be more general. Like you'd like to be more creative. And we'll actually talk about creativity today. Or you would like to achieve more focus or you'd like to be less stressed. So it's very important, that you understand that plasticity, and achieving plasticity is the first step, in what we call optimizing your brain. You don't want your brain to be plastic all the time. In fact, one of the major questions, one of the major unsolved mysteries of neuroscience is how each and every one of us wakes up every day, and knows who we are. Why should that be? Well, the brain is plastic. It has a capacity to change throughout the lifespan but it's not so plastic, that every night when we go to sleep, or in our waking that the connections get reconfigured so much so that we forget who we are, or how to walk, or how to eat. It's a good thing that we don't have, such robust plasticity or ongoing plasticity, that we have to restructure ourselves each day. It's part of what gives our life continuity. So remember, plasticity is not and is never the goal. The goal is to figure out how to access plasticity, and then to direct that plasticity, toward particular goals or changes that you would like to achieve. And I should just mention, there's no rule that in life you have to leverage this incredible thing called neuro-plasticity. No one said you had to do that. This podcast in this episode is particularly for people, who are either happy or unhappy with where they're at with a particular aspect of their life. And they wanna shift it, in some positive way. And many of you listening might say, well wouldn't everyone wanna do that? Well actually, there are a certain number of people that are pretty good where they're at and they don't wanna change and that's terrific. And I tip my hat to them and I think that's wonderful. If ever they decide that they wanna leverage these plasticity mechanisms, they can, at any stage throughout the lifespan. Let's start by talking about the different systems within the nervous system, that are available for plasticity. And in doing so, I'll frame them in the context of what I do on a daily basis, on a weekly basis, and on a yearly basis. First of all, there are several forms of plasticity. They have names like long-term potentiation, long-term depression, which has nothing to do with emotional depression, by the way. And things like spike-timing-dependent plasticity. Those names are used to describe cellular phenomenon. The actual ways that the synapses, the connections between neurons change. I'll mention those things and I'll give a little more [indistinct] to what they are as I mentioned them. But, that's probably not the best way to think about plasticity in terms of optimizing your brain. The best way to think about it is in terms of short term, medium term, and long-term plasticity. Short-term plasticity, is any kind of shift that you want to achieve, in the moment or in the day, but that you don't necessarily wanna hold on to forever. You might say, well, what kinds of things are those? Well, for instance, short-term plasticity might be, you wake up earlier than you would like to catch a flight. You're not feeling particularly alert, and you want to use a protocol, or you decide to use a protocol which could be coffee or it could be a certain form of breathing or it could be some other tool, to become more alert at a time of day when normally you aren't that alert. But, your expectation is that when you return home, you will discard with that, the need to do that at 5:30 AM because you'll be asleep at 5:30 AM. So there's short-term plasticity, behavioral plasticity. Then there's medium-term plasticity which are changes, that you might wanna make. I call this with respect, and a little bit of humor, or at least my kinda humor. I call this the undergraduate, pre-med phenomenon. For those of you that have worked with pre-meds. And I have tremendous respect for medical students and pre-meds, there is a kind of a stereotype which I don't necessarily agree with, but the stereotype is that they wanna know what they need to know for sake of the exam, but they don't really wanna know. They just want the A. And I don't think that's always true. I've worked with a number of different pre-meds over the years and there are many of them that are absolutely, passionate about the knowledge itself. And they also wanted the A. But the pre-med phenomenon as it's discussed among professors and TAs, is that, you know, you've got these students, they just wanna know what they need to know so they can get the A, right? It's medium-term plasticity. They don't actually want it to be embedded in their memory too long, or else they would actually care about the information. So that's medium term information. And sometimes that's useful for instance if you go on vacation to Costa Rica, and you don't know your way around Costa Rica. You wanna learn the different town and the routes there. But you don't have any intention of going back. It's just medium term. You wanna just program it in for sake of your time there and then you wanna discard it. Most of the time when we think about or talk about optimizing the brain, we're talking about long-term plasticity. We're talking about the kinds of changes that people wanna make so that their brain reflexively works differently. This is what a child does when it goes from not knowing how to walk to knowing how to walk. It doesn't have to think about it after it learns how to walk. It becomes reflexive. Long-term plasticity, is almost always the big goal. It's I wanna know how to speak that language. I wanna be able to do that skill. I wanna be able to feel this way, without having to put much work into it. And there are tools and protocols that one can do to achieve that. And we are going to talk about those. We've talked about a few of them in previous episodes but I will revisit those protocols today. I'm gonna frame all this in the context of the daily life, the weekly life, and the yearly life. And that's because, neuroplasticity and optimizing your brain, rides on a deeper foundation, of this thing that governs plasticity. In fact, governs all our life, called autonomic arousal which is that we're asleep for part of the 24 hour cycle and we are awake almost always. If we push ourselves and stay awake, we're okay. We can do that for a night or two, but almost always we are asleep for a portion of it and we are awake for a portion of it. I've said it before but I'll say it again. The trigger for plasticity in learning occurs during high focus, high alertness states, not while you're asleep. And the focus and alertness are both key because of the neurochemicals associated with those states. But, the actual rewiring and the reconfiguration of the brain connections happens during non sleep deep rest, which we'll talk more about as always. And, deep sleep. So you trigger the change and in sleep you get the change. So, some of the things that we'll talk about today about optimizing the brain, are centered around not sleep, but around the autonomic arousal system. We have this system of neurons in our brain and body that's just incredible, that wake us up and make us alert. And when we're not accessing that system, well, we cannot access plasticity. We can not optimize our brain. Likewise, if we cannot sleep well, and we can't rest well, we will not access plasticity and rewire our brain because that's when the actual configuration between the connections occurs. So to set this in context, I wake up each day, and I'll be totally honest. I usually don't feel like bouncing right out of bed. I usually don't feel completely rested. And that's not because I don't get enough sleep. It's probably because I'm not terrific about timing my sleep so well. Now this month isn't about sleep, that was the previous month but I really wanna emphasize a few points. I wake up, generally more tired, and groggy than I would like, because I tend to go to sleep too late. It's just some thing that I do. And I tend to get up early either because I set an alarm, because I have things to do, or because I naturally wake up early because the light coming in and so forth. Well, what that tells me is that I'm probably somebody whose natural circadian rhythm. You may have heard of chronotypes. These are genetically programmed things. But chronotype, is shorter than 24 hours. It means that the cycle of waking and alertness for me is probably shorter than 24 hours. Which means that getting some light in the late afternoon will help me shift, and make my cycle a little bit longer. It will phase delay me if that doesn't make any sense, see a previous episode. But what it really means is getting some light in the afternoon, will allow me to stay up a little bit later. But what it means is that, I'm not really matching my hard-wired needs of going to bed probably at 8:30 or 9:00 and waking up at 4:00 AM. I tend to go to sleep around 10:30, 11:00, lately around 11:30 or 12:00 and then I wake up at 6:00. And so of course, I'm gonna feel groggy. So neuroplasticity will allow me, to optimize my wakefulness but I have to do something in order to access that. And some of you may already be anticipating what I'm about to say, which is, oh, no he's gonna tell us to get sunlight in our eyes in the first 30 minutes of the day. I am gonna tell you to do that, but I'm gonna also tell you two things that I've have not discussed before, which relate to the plasticity, between the melanopsin cells. These sunlight detecting, bright light detecting cells in our eye and the circadian clock. I've never said this before in this podcast, but it turns out that the connections between these melanopsin cells and the circadian clock, are plastic throughout the lifespan. There's a massive configuration of the connections there. And a cell type called the astrocytes which are a glial cell, are actively removing and reinforcing connections between the eye and that clock, every day. Now this is incredible because other aspects of your brain that for instance, represent you knowing who you are, when you wake up in the morning, or what your name is, assuming that you're old enough that you've already learned your name. When the first things kids learn and something we rarely ever forget. Those connections, are changing all the time every 24 hour cycle. So there's an opportunity for short-term plasticity. So that's why I view sunlight first thing in the day, it helps me wake up. The other thing that I do is that there's a circuit, that exists between the circadian clock and our adrenals that I've talked about before that triggers the release of cortisol first thing in the morning, that wakes us up. Especially when we view light. So if you're groggy in the morning that's why viewing light is helpful. But, the interesting thing is if you start viewing light frequently in the morning, then those connections between the melanopsin cells and the circadian clock, become primed or potentiated we would say, they become stronger for the anticipation of light. And you naturally start waking up earlier, feeling more alert. So, what this says is and what I do is I get that regular light because I know that some mornings, I'm just not gonna feel very alert, I'll feel, especially tired. And I might not be able to access sunlight because it's really overcast or I'm traveling, or some other feature. But the system is plastic so it shifted in the right direction. Now it will shift back, because it's short-term plasticity after about two, three days. So you wanna try and get the sunlight exposure on a regular basis. The other thing that I do is I delay my intake of caffeine, for the first two hours that I'm awake. Now, this can be very painful for people. But, earlier we talked about, the adenosine system and how the accumulation of adenosine makes us sleepy. And caffeine suppresses adenosine and it makes us feel alert. But we know, that if you ingest caffeine, immediately on waking, the signal to the adrenals, to release cortisol, which is a healthy release of cortisol, and the suppression of adenosine that happens as we come out of sleep, and in deep sleep the suppression of adenosine, if you ingest caffeine too early, there's a mechanism by which the adenosine competes for the receptors et cetera, so that you have a mid-morning crash. Because if caffeine, the way it works is if caffeine is occupying the adenosine receptor, then the natural endogenous mechanisms, for suppressing adenosine, are not actually gonna have their action. So the brain to adrenal axis, is subject to plasticity also. And so by delaying caffeine until about two hours after waking, I'm able to capture, and reinforce, to potentiate, the neural circuit that exists between the circadian clock and the cortisol released in the adrenals, as well as, leave those adenosine receptors, unoccupied so that I can then use the caffeine to get a natural lift, in alertness and focus two hours later as opposed to using it, just to wake myself up out of sleepiness. So while I'm sure there are some eye-rolls out there and some yawns, about, oh no, it's the sunlight in the morning thing again. It's a powerful tool, for readjusting these circuits. So the short-term plasticity. And the reason for delaying caffeine for the first two hours of the day even if it's painful to do for the first couple of days is that then you naturally start to wake up, more readily in the morning without caffeine because, the adenosine is suppressed and you don't have these competing. It's called a competing antagonist, for the adenosine receptor. So I wake up, I get sunlight in my eyes. Lately because I wake up very early I do use a bright light, to stimulate alertness. It's not actually designed for that purpose. It's just a light board that has been about 900 lux. And then I delay caffeine. Some of you have asked, and again I'm not saying anyone has to do this. You know, what exactly do you drink? I'm a big believer in black coffee. I just happen to like black coffee. People have asked me about, and I don't wanna name brand names here about this type of coffee or, that type of coffee you mixed with these other, kinds of things. Will that increase focus? You know, I'm gonna talk today a lot about the use of diet and fasting and timing of foods and certain kinds of foods. But to be honest, black coffee is just a simple choice that's always worked for me. I also make sure I hydrate first thing in the morning. There is plenty of data now showing that even a slight, increase in dehydration, meaning just when you're lacking water, can make people have headaches. It can provide some additional photophobia for those of you that are migraine prone. Bright light can trigger migraines. That's no surprise to those of you that get headaches and migraines. But dehydration, can compound, the vulnerability to migraine and headache. So I drink water, I drink black coffee, or I drink mate which is just because I have Argentine lineage which is just a high caffeine drink first thing in the morning, but I delay it until two hours after I wake up. And that's because, I want the circuits between my eye and my circadian clock and my adrenals, to be functioning in a particular way, so that then later the caffeine is an addition. It adds more alertness. Now this is a discussion about how to optimize your brain. Many people who wake up quickly, and just naturally feel like bouncing out of bed. I envy these people. They will do just fine, by going into a learning bout or taking care of, whatever it is that they need to take care of. Sometimes that's kind of more mundane tasks like email and whatnot. Here's a more or less a rule about how the brain functions, vis-a-vis, focus, learning and creativity. And I'm gonna discuss this much more in future episodes. Generally states of high alertness, when we're very very alert, are great for strategy implementation. When we already know how to do something. And it's just simply a matter of plugging the correct elements into the correct boxes. I've talked before about duration, path and outcome, as the three things that the deliberate conscious brain is trying to figure out in order to perform certain tasks, even cognitive tasks. This is the sort of thing that we are very good at when we're well rested, and we're focused. In our autonomic arousal or our alertness rather is at a high level. If you are somebody who is hitting that alertness phase of your day, very early, right after you wake up, that's a great time to move right into things that, at least the research says, you already know, have the strategy and you just wanna implement the strategy. This is where I fundamentally depart from the idea that, oh, you know, you have to do the hardest or most critical tasks throughout the day. Sometimes the hardest and most critical tasks, are tasks that require creativity. And as we'll soon talk about creativity, and tasks related to it, oftentimes come to us best or the brain is best at achieving those, when we're in states of calm or even slightly drowsy. Which is something that's interesting in what we'll get into. But for me, for instance, I get up, I'm not terribly alert, first thing. And so I try and just get my brain and my thoughts organized. It's not a time for me to be responding in a very linear fashion to emails or carrying out calculations. That comes about two hours later. And I think many people out there will relate, mid-morning is when many people tend to achieve their peak in alertness and focus. Now, many times I get the question and this what I'm about to say is directly related to the hundreds of questions I got about this. Should I use, background music in order to learn? Should I have, you know, construction next door? Is that a good thing or a bad thing? Is it better to be in complete silence, et cetera? Now this will vary. Some people can tolerate their own noise within their head much better than others. Other people find that having some background noise, helps cancel that out. But there's a simple rule of thumb that one can use, because at least my experience is that sometimes background music, background noise is very helpful for allowing me to focus. And other times, it's very distracting. So what actually governs that? Well, we have to ask ourselves, what is at the source, of the lack of focus? If our lack of focus is because our autonomic arousal or our alertness is very, very high. We had a little too much coffee, or if there is such a thing, slept a little too long or we're really stressed or really activated, and we can't seem to focus. In that case, eliminating background noise, and really just trying to get silence, so that we can quiet some of that autonomic arousal, is going to be best for learning and for implementation of things we already know how to do. For any kind of focus linear task. Which, basically learning is a focus linear task is that you're just not necessarily, performing well all the time. Last time we talked about making errors. So as a rule of thumb, if you're too keyed up, then silence and quiet is going to be helpful. In fact, if you're very keyed up, a particular circuit, related to the basal ganglia, starts getting triggered more easily. And this circuit, I'm gonna talk about in depth. But, it's called the go, no-go circuit. We have circuits that connect our forebrain, to our structure in our brain called the basal ganglia which is actually a collection of structures. And the forebrain, which is involved in rational thought and thinking and planning and action, is always trying to plan what should I do, and then implement that action. And the basal ganglia are intimately involved in that discussion. There's a reciprocal loop of communication, between basil ganglia and cortex. The basal ganglia has one set of connections to the cortex, and the cortex back to the basal ganglia that facilitates go. It facilitates action. And the molecule, the neuromodulator dopamine, triggers the activation of go. It tends to make us want to do more things. It tends to make us bias toward action. By the way that dopamine binds to something called the D1 receptors. Just a particular type of dopamine receptor. For those of you that wanna know. The no-go pathway, the pathway in the basal ganglia, and cortex that suppresses action, involves dopamine binding to this other receptor called the D2 receptor. Now D1, D2 receptors, you can't just consciously decide, oh, I only want my D1 receptors and my D2 receptors to be active. You have to think about, which sorts of states of mind and body, facilitate go, and which ones facilitate no-go. Now this is critically important, because doing focused work, accessing plasticity, and learning, involve doing certain things and not doing others. So here's how it works. And here's how I apply it on a daily basis. Because I tend to be most alert, first thing, mid-morning or so. And then I generally will have my caffeine mid-morning. My peak of alertness, in the early part of the day, is occurring for me sometime between 9:30 and 11:00 AM. That's just me. Other people might experience that immediately after rolling out of bed. They might be wide awake and ready to go. Which case they should be cautious about throwing caffeine in the mix and it's gonna make them very, very alert. There are three sort of levels, of autonomic arousal of alertness, that bias us more toward go, no-go, or both. And this relates, to a question that I've gotten now hundreds of times from you, in the comment section for this podcast, which is, is it better for me to listen to music in the background while I work and learn, or should I have complete silence? And the answer is it depends. But it doesn't depend randomly on who you are, or even necessarily time of day, it depends, on your overall level of autonomic arousal. And it depends because, autonomic arousal level of alertness, biases the extent to which, we are more prone to gos to action, or to no-gos, to suppress action. And dopamine is this molecule that's swimming around and is going to buy us one or the other responses. So here's how it works. Let's say, I'm very alert. Maybe I got a particularly good night's sleep the night before, I had a little too much coffee, and I'm gonna sit down to some work. The thing to know, and what I always tell myself is when I'm very alert, I am very prone to go, to action, but I'm also prone to, not no-go, right? I'm not gonna be very good at suppressing action. So those are two different things. Being biased toward action and being biased, toward suppressing action are two different things, okay? So those are push pull. Toward action, suppress action. So, when you're very alert, the tendency is for everything to be a stimulus. This is why when people say, well, should I just take a drug that will increase my level of epinephrine and alertness? Will that help me learn better? No, because it will make you do things, but it will also make you less good at suppressing actions that you need to suppress. So if I'm very alert, particularly alert for me and I recognize what that state is, of course 'cause everyone will be different. I know what it is for me. Then I want silence for learning. I want it shut down my internet, which I do. I sometimes use a program, that I believe is a free program called Freedom, where it actually locks you out of the internet for a particular time. They're not a sponsor of the podcast. I just happen to use it. There's another version of Freedom where you go to the wireless thing and you turn it off. You disconnect from the wireless. That's the other one. Although, many people have a hard time not reactivating it. So I'm trying to shut down the go pathway towards distraction. And the other thing that I'll do, is I'll generally turn off my phone, put the phone outside in the car or in really extreme cases I'll throw it up on the roof which is hard for me to retrieve, so that I can't get to it. So if I'm very alert, I'm aware that I will have a bias toward action. It will be hard for me to suppress non-action, but that it's very nonspecific. Because, the next kind of level down of alertness, or autonomic arousal is clear, calm and focused where we have that kind of sweet spot between, our willingness to pursue action. We're in a mode of go, and it's not always physical action but it can be pursuing hard bouts of learning. But that our ability to suppress is also very good. And this is because, and I don't wanna get into too many details, because of the way that dopamine competes for these dopamine one receptors in the go pathway and dopamine two receptors in the no-go pathway. They're always in this kind of push pull. And so there is a sweet spot. And that sweet spot isn't flow, where it is in some sort of state where all of a sudden things come naturally to us. The state that we're trying to achieve that's optimal for learning is one in which, we have the energy and focus to pursue, but we also have the energy and focus to suppress action. So the basal ganglia are kinda working in a perfect kind of sing songly manner, through this parallel pathway. Now, as we get tired or as we round out an ultradian cycle of about 90 minutes, what happens is our fatigue even if it's not a physical fatigue that makes us wanna go to sleep, but our mental fatigue starts to accumulate because these pathways of go, no-go are actually, very metabolically consuming. So what I recognize is that as they start to falter, I have a harder time engaging and going or going toward the goal rather. I also know that my reflex, toward actions that are unrelated to the learning are also gonna start increasing because I'm not gonna be able to suppress action and activate the no-go pathways. So if this all sounds like a mouthful, let's make it very simple for you. When you are very alert, the best situation for learning is going to be silence. It's going to be complete quiet. If you are low arousal, and you're tired and you're kind of sleepy, a lot of people find that having some background chatter and some background noise, can help elevate their level of autonomic arousal. And that's because our auditory system and our visual system, are linked and are part of really what's called the salience network. Which is that we're always, scanning our environment for things. And when we have a lot of things in our environment to scan, generally our level of alertness goes up. This is why environments that are very stark or have very little or very few objects in them, tend to make us feel kind of calm, because our salient network kinda shuts off. A lot of people don't like that. They'll go to a meditation retreat, or they'll go into an environment where there's very little clutter especially city people. And all of a sudden, they start feeling really, really anxious. And that's because their internal level of autonomic arousal is really high and it's not being occupied by all this stuff to pay attention to. And so their salience network starts to turn inward. They move from exteroception to interoception. They're not looking outside themselves, they're looking inside themselves and there's a lot of noise in there. So, as a rule of thumb, if you tend to be kind of on the high level of alertness and kind of anxiety, and I'm not talking about clinical levels of anxiety but you tend to, be pretty high energy, well then, you are definitely going to benefit more in a learning bout, from learning to go as well as activate the no-go pathway. And that requires a lot of energy. And when you have a lot of distractions in your environment, there's a high probability that you're gonna be distracted from the learning. Now, some people are just naturally more calm. They're like my bulldog Costello, who's exceedingly calm. They're pretty mellow. They're kind of clear, calm and focused all of the time. And those people, actually are gonna be less flappable. They're not gonna be yanked around by background noise or they're not gonna be around, you know, bothered from their learning or from their studying by a clanging of a pot from somebody in the kitchen. So, each one of us generally tends to ride up and down this autonomic ladder, so to speak, at different times a day. For most people, three hours after waking. Those three hours, not three hours on the mark but for that three hour bin tends to be the period in which they're most alert throughout the day. Except I'll tell you later about a unique time right before sleep in which you're also very, very alert, naturally. So, that morning three hours is quite vital. Now, many of you might ask about exercise and when to exercise. I think I may have mentioned this on a previous podcast episode. But, the research shows that at least for performance, afternoon exercise might be better in terms of avoiding injury, et cetera. But in terms of rising body temperatures, and matching body temperature to have mental alertness, et cetera. It's pretty clear, that exercising early in the day, not only biases us towards waking up earlier, but that it also triggers the release of things like epinephrine and other neuromodulators, that lend itself, to a situation where we have heightened levels of arousal and mental acuity in the late morning and even into the afternoon. Now, this can be very good because if you wanna restrict most of your focus learning to the early part of the day, exercising early in the day does set a neurochemical context or mill you for go. It tends to trigger activation of the go pathway. And so for those of you like myself who have a hard time kind of engaging and getting into action early in the day, early morning exercise within an hour of waking, and certainly no later than three hours after waking, will give you quote unquote more energy throughout the day. It will make you feel more biased for action. You won't feel as lethargic. So, in can kind of reviewing what I've set up until now I do the morning light thing, I delay my caffeine two hours after waking, and then I generally try and get exercise in the first hour or ideally within the first three hours of waking up. And then I'll move into a focused learning bout. Now, some of you wrote to me and said, if I exercise early in the day, then I feel a crash afterwards. If that exercise is very, very intense. So you're depleting all your glycogen. So you're doing heavy deadlifts, et cetera. Chances are after you eat, you will start to feel a crash. So this relates to timing of nutrition. And in just as a general rule of thumb, fasted states, and low carbohydrate states, I'm not talking about a keto diet around the clock or all week but fasted states, and low carbohydrate states lend themselves to alertness. And that's because carbohydrates are rich in tryptophan, and they tend to lend themselves to sleepiness. Of course, ingesting large amounts of any kind of food, any substance that fills your gut will divert blood to your gut. So if you eat a lot of food regardless of whether or not it's a lot of carbohydrate or not, you're going to generally feel more sleepy. Now, many people, including everyone use food, to modulate their levels of autonomic arousal. And typically eating shifts us more towards a state of calm. And fasting shifts us more toward a state of alertness. And these are hard-wired circuits that relate to the need and desire to find food which requires action, or the so-called rest and digest system which diverts our resources and our energy towards digestion. It makes us feel calm. So I personally rely on water, mate, and black coffee first thing in the day, in order to exercise and get into the first round of work. If I find that I'm too alert, and then I generally will tend to eat and kind of bring down my level of alertness, and will continue working. Now this is in district thing. And since people asked me what I do, and I'm not dictating that people follow it exactly of course or even generally, but I'll just tell you what I do. It is possible if you're drinking black coffee, or mate and you're ingesting a lot of water, that you're going to dehydrate yourself somewhat, because of excretion of sodium. Provided you don't have hypertension, salt is a really good thing. A lot of people think that they are low on blood sugar because they're shaky and they can't think or they have a headache when actually they're low in sodium. And especially if you're drinking a lot of caffeine. So I'm a big believer in salt. So I drink salt water first thing in the morning because I drink black coffee. And that keeps my levels of alertness really good. I always thought that I had messed up blood sugar. I had shaky hands and I didn't know what was going on. I'd drink a little bit of coffee and feel too amped up. And turns out that it was a sodium issue. And if I just drank water with a little bit of sea salt and or even just a typical table salt, then I'd fell rock solid in terms of my blood sugar. Now, again, I'm not a physician, I'm a professor so I don't prescribe anything, but I profess lots of things. So I don't want people who have diabetes or blood sugar issues to go off the rails. You're responsible for your health, not me. But it's an interesting parameter to think about and experiment with, you know, provided that your doctor says it's okay, because I think a lot of people, probably ingest too much sodium but a lot of people might be sodium deficient in particular the people that are fasting. I typically eat my first meal right around mid day, whether or not I've exercised or not. And the food content there is actually quite important to me. I don't know why this is. I don't have a scientific mechanism for this but if I eat hot food for lunch, I get sleepy after lunch. So I generally don't eat hot food for lunch. I might have a little bit of soup or something like that. But in general, I rely on a low carbohydrate meal. I'll eat meat or salad or some variation of that and nuts and fats and things like that because of the [indistinct] content for focus, because the protein is good in my belief. And because I believe in eating fruits and vegetables. I do that too. If I've exercised very hard early in the day, I do ingest starches like oatmeal or rice and fruit and things like that. Now, why am I telling you all this? Because, 100s if not 1000 people ask me, is fasting good for focus? And indeed fasting will increase alertness, but if you're so hungry or preoccupied with food that you can't focus well, then it's not gonna be good for learning. It's only going to be good for agitation. Now, I'm just gonna mark continue to march through my day. And this is, of course what I experienced. Some people are quite different. But, what I find is around 2:00 or 3:00 PM, I start getting a little groggy. A little bit sleepy. I will tend to shift my work from work that requires a lot of duration path, outcome, really careful analysis and activation of the no-go pathway. Meaning I'm trying to suppress the impulse to look at my phone or answer email, or do other things. This is why I haven't emailed you back until 3:00 in the afternoon. By the way, or responded to your text messages, whoever you are out there. Around early afternoon, I find I can do kind of typical more mundane tasks. Because, those tasks require less cognitive load. And they can be done more or less, in and out of sequence. I can answer a couple email here, maybe answer that email there. I don't have to do it in pure linear fashion. Any kind of linear work or learning work is gonna take a lot of focus. And then typically around 4:00 PM or so, I do two things. Sometimes a little earlier. Sometimes a little later but I do two things. One, is I make sure I hydrate. Because if you're exercising and you're eating, you need to digest that food, et cetera. I make sure I hydrate. So I drink water. I try and refrain from drinking coffee in the afternoon. This is a new thing for me. I sometimes do it, but I try and refrain from that. And then I always do, a non sleep deep rest protocol sometime in the afternoon. This is sometimes a 10 minute yoga nidra type protocol, or a 30 minute yoga nidra type protocol. These are protocols I have no relationship to, no business relationship to whatsoever. I've been doing them for years now. They involve listening to a script. We'll provide the links again although we've provided them before. Or I'll do a hypnosis protocol, from Reveri Health which is my colleague David Spiegel's website that has these free hypnosis apps or scripts that you can listen to. And those take me into a state of really deep rest. Sometimes so much so that I fall asleep. And I always set an alarm so that I don't sleep for longer than 90 minutes. But typically this goes for about 30 minutes. And I do that because for me by about 4:30 in the afternoon, I'm capable of doing basically nothing. I am just a complete Costello. I can't think, I can't do, I can't respond to email. I've just completely troughed my ability to function. I personally find it a mistake, to that point, down a double espresso, and charge really hard. It just doesn't work for me. I end up really disrupting my sleep schedule. I end up disrupting a lot of different things. So for me, I do the non sleep deep rest protocol. It really helps me later when I need to fall asleep. It helps with all sorts of things, as I mentioned before. But I usually emerge from that a little groggy or feeling like I have another whole day, second wind. Like I could just work. And then I'll do a second bout of learning. I'll do some sort of work that either involves linear analysis of something. So maybe numerical work or I'm trying to learn something. I generally try and really use those bouts of 90 minute focus energy after the non sleep deep rest. And as I mentioned in previous episodes, there's a lot of evidence, that these non sleep deep rest protocols can enhance and accelerate plasticity. The most I think recent and striking one is the study that we referenced last time in the caption notes. It was the cell press article, Cell Reports, great journal. Was showing that these 20 minute, kinda shallow naps and non sleep deep rests, can facilitate sensory motor learning. So then I'll go into another learning bout that's caffeine free. This learning bout is very different than the morning one. This is a work bout or learning bout that's more in the clear common focus regime because I've come out of this non sleep deep rest. I'm not ingesting caffeine because I wanna make sure that I can sleep later that night really well. And, this tends to be more when I do creative type work. Now, creativity is a topic that we're gonna spend the entire month on coming up soon. But creativity is a very interesting state of mind in which, we're taking existing elements. Things that we already know, and rearranging them in ways that are novel. And I'd say, well, duh, that's what creativity is. But creativity has two parts. It has a creative discovery mode where you're kind of shuffling things around in a very relaxed way and kind of being playful or exploring different configurations. And then creativity also has, an absolutely linear implementation mode. In which you take the idea or the design you've come up with and you create something very robust and concrete. And so creativity is really a two part thing. And the first part of actively exploring different configuration, sometimes in a playful way, sometimes in a way that's almost random and just kind of exploring. That state is definitely facilitated by being relaxed and almost sleepy. That is not a state that I personally can access very well early in the day. I've tried to access it coming out of sleep because one would say, well you're still sleepy early in the day and just doesn't work. Most of what I write down. Most of what I do is complete garbage. And so what I found is there's this block in the afternoon of about 90 minutes where, I can do creative type writing or creative type imagination of, scientific ideas or experiments we might wanna do. Science might not seem like a creative endeavor to many of you, but it is. Has a lot of imagining what if this, or we could combine that and thinking of novel concepts or ways of arranging things. So when you find yourself in that kinda clear common focused mode, creative works tend to come about very well in those regimes. Now I know there are a lot of people out there rely on substances to access creative states. I'm not a marijuana user. It's just not the drug for me, for a variety of reasons. I'm not a drinker. It's not the substance for me for a variety of reasons. You know, I'm not a cop I'm not out here to tell people what they should do or shouldn't do. The problem with using substances to access creativity, is that generally the substances that relax people, will allow them to get into that creative brainstorming mode, but not so good at the linear implementation mode. You know, the other day I was remarking with a friend that there are some ads, some advertisements that I've seen over the years, that are just incredible. I'll just tell you what they are. So there's not cryptic or anything. I'm revealing my tastes here. There's a particular perfume ad that Spike Jones made that is just amazing. I'll put a link to it cause it's just so cool. I don't want to give away the end but it has a feature of it that is particularly interesting to me as a neuroscientist. And it's just so cool. 'Cause I grew up in the skateboarding thing, I knew a little bit about Spike's movies and skateboarding and he's of course made a lot of very impressive, popular movies as well, full length features. I don't know him personally, so this isn't a plug. Not that he needs my endorsement for anything at all. But the amazing thing about this advertisement is it's a collection of things that you would never really think would be combined, and it involves different speeds of motion and all sorts of effects. I mean, it's like a real classic like Spike Jones kind delivery. But, what's incredible is when you think about not just the fact that someone had to imagine that but to actually implement the steps in order to create that, when you see this you'll realize that was a ton of work. You can't just put that together randomly. And so a lot of people, not Spike clearly, but a lot of people who have an incredible mind for ideas and novel arrangements of things, they are great at accessing that state but not so good at accessing the implementation state. It's also true that a lot of people and some who tend to fall on what we would call the kind of like more Asperger's or autism end of the spectrum, are very good at linear implementation. Now I'm not talking about all forms of autism of course. I'm sensitive to the fact that there are many forms on the spectrum. But, some people are very good at linear implementation. And that's, a separate state from a creative state. So, that afternoon block is when I try and access the freer kind of looser mindset that's associated with the fatigue that comes later in the afternoon. And, for some of you that state that favors creativity and creative learning, might be better in the morning. I don't know. You're gonna have to decide. For some of you you're gonna be late shifted. Some of you are gonna be morning shifted. But where we have alertness, generally we are good at linear implementation, we're good at activating the no-go pathway and suppressing action, and we are good at pursuing particular goals and strategy implementation. And where we tend to be more relaxed, and we tend to be almost in a kind of sleepy mode. So for me, coming out of one of these non sleep, deep rest modes or sleep, that's when we tend to be better at novel configurations of existing elements, which is creativity. And this brings about a question that I get, all the time. Which is, what about psychedelics? So, I am going to talk, to some experts on psychedelics. I hope to bring some of them in. Actually speaking on people coming in or creatures coming. A creature that's definitely not on psychedelics who doesn't need any is Costello and he just arrived. He seems to be in a sleepy state most, all the time. Hey buddy, how you doing? You come in, yep. He's working on his 15th sleep deep rest episode of the day which is generally followed by a 10 to 12 hour deep rest episode, almost exclusively comprised of REM. And I know this 'cause his eyes are open 'cause they're so droopy, he can't close them all the way and his eyes are going like this. And he's going down for the count. So, yeah, nice and big yawn. Okay so, psychedelics. First of all, I wanna be very clear. I am neither a proponent, nor am I somebody who rejects the potential role of psychedelics. I do however, think that psychedelics, can be particularly hazardous, for people who have preexisting psychological issues, and are not working with a board certified, psychiatrist or physician, as well as for essentially all kids. I think that the young brain is basically in its own psychedelic state and just naturally. And all kidding aside, I think that the young brain is so subject to neuroplasticity, that drugs, which like psychedelics which are very powerful, can be detrimental to the developing brain. That's just my stance. If anyone disagrees with me, I'd be happy to chat with you about it in a polite and discourse. I'll be happy to listen as well as tell you more why I believe that based on the data. I'm mentioning psychedelics because many of you asked. Here's the deal with psychedelics. At least here's how they work. In a nutshell, psychedelics were thought to unleash sensory processing and to make it less filtered. We have a lot of different inputs from our eyes, from our ears, from our nose, from our taste, et cetera that you're coming in all the time in parallel. And we have mechanisms that suppress some of and allow us to only focus on things that are happening. Visually, generally we don't have synesthesia unless some of us happen to have synesthesia. We don't blend what we see with what we hear in a way, that is confusing to us. We know what's making sounds and we know what is a visual stimulus. On psychedelics, people report being able to smell colors or to, you know, hear trees, et cetera. And that's because there's a lot of sensory blending. Over that's led to the misconception, that sensory blending itself, is a creative process. There's nothing creative about sensory blending. You know there's, the essence of a creative process, is that some novel configuration of elements, whether or not it's notes on a piano, or whether or not it's words on a page, whether or not it's numbers or whether or not it's movement. That some way in which those are configured in some new way, that the algorithm, the way in which, they are configured makes sense to the observer. And this is a key thing. It seems to me that when people report their psychedelic experiences, it makes a lot more sense to the person who experiences it, than to the observer. And so, creative works by definition are new ways of configuring things that lend themselves to a bigger or greater or deeper or novel understanding on the part of the observer. And just sensory blending is not gonna accomplish that. Now it is true and there's a great review in the journal cell, excellent journal about how psychedelics work. And it turns out, they don't just work, by allowing for more sensory blending. They do, because of the way that they activate certain serotonin receptors et cetera. They do lend themselves to more lateral connectivity between different brain areas, more novel associations. So in principle, in principle, I should say not necessarily in practice, but in principle, they do allow different areas of the brain. Maybe even the two sides of the brain to communicate more broadly than they would normally. So that has certain elements that speak to creativity. But, it can't simply be the case that psychedelics are the portal to creativity. Because creativity, as I mentioned before, involves not just novel associations and a breaking of kind of space-time rules, it also involves reconfiguring things, such that the new space-time rule that one comes up with, is interesting, stimulating and kind of in many cases, delightful to the observer. And that's why, many claims that, you know, psychedelics open plasticity or they increase creativity. That's not sufficient for me personally. I'm curious about, does it not just open the creative thinking process, this novel configuration process? But does it also, lend itself to the implementation of creative works? And the answer is, no. In most cases it has nothing to do with creative implementation. Now, I think that, there may come a time and certainly there are clinical trials that are happening now, where psychedelics are leveraged toward particular clinical goals. And I wanna tip my hat to the work at Johns Hopkins that's happening now, which really lends itself, to the idea that early preliminary data and some of the papers that are coming out they're really fantastic. Showing that there may be some excellent roles for certain psychedelics in certain clinical context. These are clinical studies done with a psychiatrist present, that is authorized to do that. That can help people through depression, trauma, et cetera. And we're gonna spend a lot of time talking about that, including with some of those folks running those studies. So we can look forward to that. So all of this is to say that, no I don't take psychedelics to access creative states. That's not where I think the major role, the important role of psychedelics might show up if it's going to for humanity. I think that it may have these important roles in the clinical context. Provided it's done legally and safely. I think that, the creative process being a two-stage process means that, I am personally best served by having this period of non-linear exploration of concepts. Whatever it is I happen to be working on in the afternoon. But then I'll actually shelve that work. I'll just set it aside and then I'll revisit it the next day or even the next day, to see whether or not that the work itself is ready for deliberate linear implementation which I would wanna do during one of these highly focused states. So, the long and short way of saying this is that, when we're very alert, do linear type of operations. When we tend to be more sleepy and more relaxed, that's when creative works can first be conceived, but their implementation requires high levels of alertness. Now, that gets us more to the kind of late afternoon evening. Now I am, as I mentioned before, I'm a proponent of getting sunlight in the evening as well. This is a critical thing that I have not mentioned before. Here's how it works. Many people now have heard me say getting light early in the day is important. But that will advance one's clock. It'll make you wanna get up earlier the next day. By getting light in the evening it accomplishes two things for me. First of all, it makes sure that I don't get up too early that I'm not waking up at 3:00 or 4:00 in the morning because it's going to shift my clock. It's going to delay it a little bit. And so this is really important. If you want to keep your schedule on a normal routine, on a regular 24 hour cycle and not have your circadian rhythms of sleep and wakefulness drifting all over the place and you want some predictability to how your mind is going to work in order to optimize learning and performance. Well, then you need to get morning light any evening light. The morning light is going to advance my clock. Make my system wanna get up earlier. And the evening light is going to delay my clock a little bit so that on average it kind of bookends my circadian mechanisms. And I'll basically wanna go to sleep at more or less the same time each night and wake up, more or less at the same time each morning. That's how it works. And that's a hard wired mechanism. That's not some subjective thing that I tell myself. That's a hardwired mechanism. So, that gets us to the evening. And generally in the evening I'll get that light by going outside or sometimes I'll do it by turning up artificial lights brightly, and then I'll start to dim them for the evening 'cause as I've mentioned many times before and I'm not gonna belabor the point. You wanna minimize your light exposure, especially overhead bright light exposure, regardless of whether or not it's blue light or not. In the evening from about 10:00 PM to 4:00 AM. Some of you asked, wait I thought it was 11:00 PM to 4:00 AM? Well, it is, but 10:00 PM to 4:00 AM is even better. It's just that when I originally said 10:00 PM to 4:00 AM, people were like that it's impossible for most people to adhere to. So for me, it screens off, it's dim lights, and that's what favors falling asleep in a good night's sleep for me. Since we were talking about food earlier, I'll just revisit a little bit of what I said before. My evening meal tends to be more carbohydrate rich more. If I have proteins, there'll be like eggs, fish or chicken or something of that sort or no protein. And I eat high carbohydrates. So I'm not one of these people that's keto or high meat only, or anything like that. Remember, fasting and low carbohydrate, states facilitate alertness. Carbohydrate rich foods, facilitate calmness and sleepiness. They'd stimulate the release of tryptophan and the transition to sleep. So that's why I do them late in the day. Also, if you've exercised early in the day, especially if it's weight bearing exercise or everything's weight bearing exercises. I suppose unless you're an astronaut. And you're in space. But if you're early in the day, exercising with weights or you're doing a long run, sooner or later, you need to replenish glycogen. And, I realized that the ketonisters out there are gonna say, well, you know, gluconeogenesis will allow you to replenish glycogen, et cetera. I'm just gonna call out the lie right now, because I feel like doing it. And 'cause I think it just hasn't been stated. Which is that, not everybody, but a lot of the people that are proponents of high meat keto diets, fine. That's fine if that's what they wanna do. And as you recall, I do relatively ketogenic diet during the day, for alertness or fasting. But a lot of those people, can replenish glycogen really well without ingesting carbohydrates, so-called gluconeogenesis and enhance protein synthesis. Because they are hormone enhanced. I've been around a while. I know what this looks like. They're either thyroid enhanced or hormone enhanced and I don't pass any judgment. But when you look at people who look amazing on keto and are able to have a lot of energy and replenish their glycogen on keto, they are in many cases, not all, but in many cases they're hormone enhanced. They're taking exogenous hormones, that allow them to synthesize, and repair muscle in ways that people who aren't taking those exogenous hormones can't. This is not just true of the men by the way. This is also true of the women. And this is a whole discussion into itself probably not directly related to this month of the podcast. So, I don't mind that people do this, but one problem is when people are following ketogenic diets all the way through to sleep and they have trouble with sleep or they're doing long bouts of fasting and they're having trouble falling asleep. That makes sense. It's because their autonomic arousal is tilted towards epinephrine release, norepinephrine release, and dopamine release. So they have a lot of energy but they have a hard time calming down and getting into deep sleep. I tend to achieve that state using carbohydrates and it also replenishes glycogen. So again, you know, I'm not trying to draw any fire, but if I do, I'd be happy to have a conversation, about all that. Again, no judgment, but I think that most people out there are not aware of some of the other variables. Remember, good science is about isolating variables. And so oftentimes what we're seeing in social media, is we're getting presented single variables and we're not seeing the full context of the other variables that are being manipulated. So, I eat pasta and rice and vegetables and things like that in the evening. Also, I just find, maybe I'm becoming one of the last people that does that. Although I hope not. I hope there are others out there like me. From all the literature speaks to the fact that carbohydrates not only do that, but they also help maintain, healthy thyroid function, et cetera. So that's my bias. That's what I do. I do avoid caffeine and whatnot in the evening. I do take supplements and I'll be happy at some point to put out the complete list of supplements that I take out there. But in general, these are the core things that I do. And they relate to a lot of the questions that you've been asking over time. The next piece of scientific data that I'm gonna describe is a very important piece of scientific data, for sake of understanding how to optimize your brain and access sleep. It also can help avoid a lot of anxiety issues. And these relate to data from Charles Czeisler, doctor. He's an MD Charles Czeisler's lab at Harvard Medical School. He's run a sleep lab out of Harvard Medical School. For a long time now it has very impressive work. And what he's shown is that the peak output, of the circadian clock for wakefulness, in other words the peak of our wakefulness, and the suppression of the sleep signal, actually happens very late in the day. So we have this trough of activity and body temperatures lowest right before waking. Then as we wake up our body temperature goes up and into the afternoon it continues to go up and then it tends to fall in the evening and towards bedtime. But there's a brief blip, of release of peptides and other substances from the sleep centers in the brain, and the suprachiasmatic nucleus that the sleep center is this preoptic area, that if you wanna look that up. This preoptic area not far from the circadian clock that signals the peak of alertness and wakefulness about an hour, before bedtime. And he say, whoa, that's really weird. But a lot of people get into bed. They're ready to go to sleep and they're wide awake. And they think this is an unnatural thing or there's something wrong with them. And actually it's not. This it's believed, I don't know, again, I wasn't consulted at the design phase. But it's believed, is a signal that is helpful to human beings to start gathering up resources and securing themselves for a night's sleep during which we, you know, historically were very vulnerable to attack from other humans and from animals and so forth. And so that desire to run around and clean the kitchen or organize things, or just a general feeling of internal anxiety, late in the evening, that's a natural blip that naturally passes after about 45 to 60 minutes. Now that's often the time when people start stressing about the fact that they have something to do the next day and they worry about not being able to sleep and it can cascade into a whole set of things. So another thing that I do throughout my day is I know that early day I'm gonna be alert, afternoon I'm gonna be kinda sleepy. And then as the evening comes around, in addition to doing all the other things I'm doing, I anticipate, a peak in alertness in activity. And I don't worry about it. I use that perhaps to get organized for the next day but basically, I just go through, if I'm gonna do anything, it's gonna be very mundane task like cleaning or things that require almost zero effort. And that probably speaks to my cleaning abilities too. But, the fact of the matter is we don't just go drift off into sleep. There's this blip of alertness right before sleep that I hope just cognitively knowing about will be helpful to people. And that raises, yet another theme that I think is going to be very important. Which is, physiological mechanisms. Like these changes in alertness. Or using breathing tools. Something we'll talk about in future episodes to shift our levels of autonomic arousal. Those are concrete, biological phenomenon. So is fasting. Fasting will increase alertness that way. So is caffeine. Not everybody's susceptible to caffeine to the same degree of others But, it's a physiological mechanisms. We know the receptors. We know the ligands as they're called which bind to the receptors. We know the mechanisms. They involve cortisol and epinephrine. Those are the sorts of things that I personally try and leverage, toward my learning and optimization of my brain, and my activity. Doing physical activity early in the day for instance, tends to give us a longer duration, wake up signal, intends to accelerate waking up early in the day. That's why working out late in the day can sometimes cause people to have trouble falling asleep. It will also phase delay. You make it so that you wanna wake up later the next day. It's not just 'cause you're tired. It's 'cause you shifted your clock with activity and temperature. Many people ask me about subjective tools for plasticity. What about visualization? Can we just imagine doing a particular activity, will that help us get better at that activity? There's some evidence that visualization can do that, it's true. But here's the important distinction. And here's why I personally, don't do much, deliberate visualization. First of all, I get my best ability, or achieve my best ability to visualize things when I'm in kind of a sleepy state. I don't know why but that's when I'm able to, direct my brain towards internal visualization with my eyes closed. And generally I fall asleep and I can't remember anything that I was thinking about before. Some people, and these are work that was done many years ago by Roger Shephard and by others. Roger was at Stanford but and other labs have done this too, of course, of rotating objects physically in their mind, as a way of improving or looking at the speed of spatial calculations and so forth. Some people are very good at visualization. They can close their eyes and they can just see objects and rotate them deliberately, et cetera. A lot of people like me, when we start doing that, our mind drifts too easily. But I like to think I'm a reasonably focused person in the waking state. So, visualization it's interesting 'cause I think people are very attracted to the idea, that they can just think about something and then get better at it that way. And it's probably true, if you can be very linear in the way that you visualize things. So I wanna repeat that. I think visualization does have certain power. If you can remain very linear and deliberate and focused, in the visualization. But many people like myself who are challenged, with maintaining that linear focus with eyes closed, and in visualization, they don't get much out of visualization. And I think the data on performance really supports that. Now there are examples where for instance, people will injure one limb and then they will exercise the intact limb, or the non-injured limb rather. And they will visualize the opposite limb. Sometimes there's even the use of mirror boxes. So that let's say my left limb is injured. I'm maintaining activity with my right limb but I'm using a mirror box so it looks like my left limb is working well. Yes, there's some top-down or feedback mechanisms, that support the idea that the injured limb can rehabilitate more quickly, et cetera. But, those are fairly elaborate schemes. I don't want a mirror boxes around my house. I think these are specialized circumstances. They're a little bit like the examples that we see in the news where, oh, so-and-so has a stroke and then spontaneously speaks a new language. I don't know what the answer to that is. It shows that the brain has associative networks that are typically suppressed and those can be unleashed. But you certainly don't wanna go out and give yourself a stroke deliberately to try and unmask some skill, because there's no concrete way to go about that in a way that you could really know that you were gonna offset the detrimental effects of the stroke. In fact, I think it'd be a terrible idea. So I think what I'm trying to describe is how a typical, I don't know if I'm typical or normal. I mean, I've been told otherwise, and certainly not normal. But in terms of the way that I structure my day, I think that's normal. That's pretty normal. I tend to wake up right around, I don't know, somewhere between 5:30 and 7:00 AM, depending on what I've been doing the night before. I tend to go to sleep somewhere around 10:30, 11:00. I tend to have one bout in the morning where I can do really focused hard work and I can really activate the go pathway while also activating the no-go pathway so that I can really stay focused. But I rely on some tools. I have a period in the afternoon where I get sleepy and kinda out of it like I think most people. And I tend to come out of that recognizing the opportunity of that slightly sleepy state for creative work and for thinking about things in novel ways. I get light a couple of times a day. I eat low carb during the day, and I don't say high, but you know, higher carbs I eat starches, in the evening. So in a way I can sleep. And then, I really anticipate that late afternoon peak and alertness. Excuse me, late night peak and alertness that many people confuse for insomnia or challenges when actually they're really quite normal in their circadian cycle. And then I fall asleep. And if all goes well, I stay asleep for four or five hours. Typically it's three or four and then I wake up. I think I'm like most people I wake up during the middle of the night. Now, one thing that I don't think has been discussed a lot but one of my colleagues at the Stanford sleep lab tells me is that, every hour and a half or so, we all wake up. Some of you even look around, believe it or not and go right back to sleep. And you don't recognize it. Waking up periodically during sleep is the norm. It is not abnormal. I don't know why this hasn't been discussed more prominently. I tend to wake up and if there's a bright light coming through the blinds, or if there's some noise upstairs, if Costello's snoring particularly loud, I might get up, I might, go use the restroom. I might, you know, pick up a book and read under low light or something and then I generally fall back asleep and wake up, typical time for me again, 5:30 or 7:00 AM in the morning. This waking up in the middle of the night thing as I mentioned at the beginning of the podcast episode today, is not necessarily abnormal. What it probably reflects, is that the real time meaning, the time that I should go to sleep is probably closer to eight o'clock. The word midnight was literally supposed to mean mid night. We, many meaning all of us were meant to go to sleep and wake up with the rise, you know, with the setting and rising of the sun. And we know this because this beautiful study from University of Colorado, where they took people out into the wilderness to reset their circadian clocks, measured by way of melatonin and cortisol. They were completely out of whack from interacting with screens and staying up too late, et cetera. And they basically had them view the sunrise and view the sunset each evening and almost all of them not all of those students, but all of them, got onto a schedule where they naturally wanted to go to sleep at sunset and wake up around sunrise or just before sunrise, even when they were brought back into a normal artificial light setting. So I think that's the natural pattern and we've just deviated from it with artificial lights. So waking up at 3:00 AM or 4:00 AM doesn't necessarily mean that there's something screwed up about you. Or that you have anxiety or something, although you might. What it likely means is that you were supposed to go to bed much earlier. And because of this asymmetry in the autonomic nervous system where it's much easier for us to push, and to delay our sleep time than it is to accelerate our wake-up time. In other words, it's easier to stay up and hang out at the party even if you don't wanna be there than it is to wake up when you're exhausted and your fast sleep. Most people are pushing through, into the late hours of the evening and night and going to bed much later than they naturally would want to. And so I personally don't want to go to bed at 8:00 PM. A lot of good things happen between 8:00 PM and 11:00 PM. And so, I wanna enjoy those. And I push through the evening hours. But as a consequence, I'm running out of melatonin. My melatonin release is basically subsided by about 3:00 or 4:00 AM and so it makes sense that I would wake up. I don't take melatonin for reasons discussed in previous episodes. I do rely on things like magnesium glycinate or magnesium threonate, things like theanine. I'm not saying any of you need to take those. That's just what I happened to take in order to facilitate my sleep. And it's been of great benefit to me. If I wake up in the middle of the night and I'm anxious for whatever reason or my mind is looping, I have a couple of rules. One is, I don't trust anything I think about. When I wake up in the middle of the night, any of it. Unless I've had a magnificent dream and I wanna write it down, I'll do that every once in a while. Typically when I go back and read it, it's not at all magnificent. I can't ever remember coming up with anything really fantastic in one of my dreams that stuck with me, or that I implemented. I don't really trust the kind of thinking that happens in those wee hours of the circadian cycle for me. There's just nothing either for me terribly creative, or worth linear implementation at that time. But, one thing that has been very helpful is to sometimes do one of these non sleep deep rest protocols as a way to go back into sleep. So a hypnosis app or some of the scripts by Michael Sealey that I've mentioned before, or the Reveri Health, or a yoga nidra protocol. Those for me have been very useful at helping me turn off, kinda looping thinking in the middle of the night and fall back asleep. In reviewing my schedule for you, just as a context for how to implement certain types of tools for optimizing learning. Realize that, it gives the impression that there's a 90 minute bout of learning and work in the morning and then a 90 minute bout of creative type work in the afternoon and that's it. There are a lot of hours in between of course, and I just wanna be very clear. Those hours for me are occupied by pretty not mundane tasks but things that are kinda random. Those are things like email or attending to Zoom meetings or meeting with colleagues and students and things of that sort. I sometimes will read just for sake of my own enrichment. I mentioned those two 90 minute bouts because those are the two 90 minute bouts where I'm trying to expand on, the mental capacities that I already have. They're to really where I'm trying to stretch and grow what I'm able to do on a regular basis reflexively. So I wanna emphasize that the whole day doesn't just consist of those two 90 minute bouts. That's not the way my schedule works and that's not the way my lifestyle is arranged. Which is fortunate 'cause I enjoy all those other things as well. And so for many of you out there who are in school or have family demands or other demands, the key is to slot in those brain optimization segments of about 90 minutes, one or two, or maybe more per day. You're trying to slot those in wherever you can amidst to your other, obligations and things that you need to do. But, you wanna do that in an intelligent way that's anchored to your biology. And then you wanna do a number of things which I've talked about today, in order to optimize those sessions to get the most out of them. So as we round up, I acknowledged that once again I've covered a huge range of topics, related to how to optimize learning, and brain change, and essentially mental performance. And I've set that in the context, of some biological mechanism like the basal ganglia, go, no-go pathways, the circadian autonomic system, and some of the relationship between food and fasting and particular types of food in alertness or sleepiness. Linear focus and strategy implementation is best served by high alert states, although not too alert, and how creative states, at least the first phase of creativity, which is the creative arrangement, kind of brainstorming stage is supported by states of kind of relaxation or even slightly sleepy. But the creative implementation is a very linear and focused and deliberate process, much like the highly focused state, that I described. I described how I do these things so just to give you a context. A lot of you asked for, you know, what I do in order to set it within a context. But by no means are these rigid times and ways of doing things. But, I think it's fair to say that, what I do has a circadian logic. It also has grounding in biological mechanisms that are very concrete. That we know the cells and mechanisms and neuro-transmitters. And then some of them are a little bit headed out into the, what we would call, kind of emerging, or, you know, I don't wanna say cutting edge, but maybe front edge of what neuroscience is starting to understand about creativity and so forth. Those are areas that are just now, coming to some clarity. And there is certainly is still a lot more work to do. There are a lot of different ways to arrange one's routine. But hopefully, the tools and practices I described, will be useful to you. I wanna mention that a lot of people ask me about specific tools and practices. They asked me of Wim Hof Breathing, about ice baths. Have talked a little bit about ice baths before I think in cold exposure. About binaural beats and things of those sorts. I think the way to look at any tool, to modulate or measure the nervous system, is ask whether or not it's going to move you up or down, the state of autonomic arousal. Whether or not it's gonna can make you more alert or more calm. More focused or less focused. That's kind of the two axes here that we need to think about. Sometimes you wanna be more alert than you are. And indeed, things like cold showers, ice baths, super oxygenation, Wim Hof type breathing, will bring your level of alertness up. There's some cautionary notes associated with each of those. You need to read and understand those cautionary notes, for yourself. Everybody's different and some of those carry certain dangers, under certain conditions. Others have huge margins for safety. An ice bath generally wakes you up. A warmer, hot bath generally calms you down, right? Binaural beats, there aren't a lot of data and quality peer-reviewed journals. I did put in the effort to go search it out. There are a few. Binaural beats are listening to frequencies of sound that slightly differ offset for the two ears. It has been shown, can shift the brain into particular states. You'll notice today, I didn't really talk about alpha or theta or gamma rhythms. I personally in reviewing the literature, I don't think it's fair to say that alpha states are great for X and theta states are great for Y. And besides, most of us aren't walking around our homes and our workplaces, geared up to EEG machines or with wires down below our skull. So we don't know when we're in those states anyway. I think the subjective reading of whether or not one is alert, or calm, and whether or not that alertness or calmness matches the goal or that thing that we're trying to achieve in terms of learning, including sleep, is the most valuable, internal tool and recognition that we can all have. In other words, if I want to be very alert and I need to be very alert and I'm exhausted, there might be tools that I should use to wake up. It might also speak to the fact that I might not have slept as well as I could have or should have the night before. So it's really about a match between where we are on that autonomic arousal scale and what we're trying to achieve. And indeed, there are gonna be a lot of tools including supplements and other prescription drugs and things that can help, move us along that autonomic continuum, up toward more alertness or toward more calmness. But ultimately it's about tailoring that alertness and calmness to the specific types of learning and activities that you are going to do and perform. And, it's reciprocal. Meaning some of those activities like exercise early in the day will increase your level of autonomic arousal and alertness. Certain foods, will tend to wake you up. Certain foods will tend to make you more sleepy and the volume of food and the timing of food is a factor also. So it's a huge parameter space. It's a huge set of variables, that impacts whether or not we're feeling well, performing well, learning great, or not learning great. And the key thing is to become an observer, of your own system and what works for you. And, to recognize that there are two bins of tools for optimizing, learning and brain performance. One, are tools that are really anchored in biological mechanism and we are certain of what those are. I've talked about some of those. The other, the more subjective tools, for some of you visualization, might work terrifically well. For some of you, one song might really wake you up because of the associations you have with it. And for me, I might just, you know, it might repel me from the room. 'Cause I don't like it or it might put me to sleep. But of course, volume is kind of a universal. Loud music tends to wake people up. Soft music, doesn't tend to wake them up quite as much. So, part of today is really getting you to think about, in a scientific way, in a structured way, about the non-negotiable elements which are that you're going to have a period of every 24 hour cycle when you tend to be more awake, and a period when you tend to be more asleep. And how to leverage those so you're not fighting an uphill battle to wake up when you actually, would want to be in and should be sleepy and not trying to go to sleep when you are naturally, going to be most awake. So a lot of it is really anchors back to those core mechanisms of biology, and then you start layering on the different protocols of food and supplementation, et cetera. And I think it's important to recognize that some people are just more go and no-go. And some people, are just calmer and have a harder time getting into action in an activity. It's just the way that we're wired. Some of us have autonomic nervous systems that are more geared towards parasympathetic, calm states. One of the reasons I love bulldogs, not just my bulldog, is that they are very calm animals. In fact, they make no spontaneous movements unless there's something to respond to. And I find that incredibly relaxing. Other animals like pit bulls, who I also really like and enjoy and other species, their tail is always wagging. And that they're always in a position to make a movement at any any second 'cause they tend to ride at pretty high levels of autonomic arousal. They pop up really quickly. When you say it's time to go for a walk, Costello does it one limb at a time. And sometimes he just goes back to sleep. And so, that there are people like that too. And so you have to know where you are and what particular goals you're trying to pursue. As a final closure to this, I wanna emphasize that today as always, I've strived to be accurate. I'm sure if I made mistakes, some of you will point out and I appreciate that. And I'll post a correction, if we agree that I indeed misspoke, or misguided something. But, by no means was I exhaustive. I mean, I might've exhausted some of you but the information wasn't exhaustive. Meaning, there's no way that I could cover all the ways in which, we optimize or can optimize learning and performance. I think we've touched on a number of them that I hope, that you'll find value in and that you'll explore in your own lives. We are continuing with this theme because that's what we do, for this podcast. We stay on one theme for an entire month. For the next episode, we're going to explore two, very essential aspects of neuroplasticity. That actually relate to learning. Which are pain, pain management, and neural regeneration. And for those of you that, don't have injuries or don't suffer from chronic pain, the discussion is still gonna be a very important one. Because it's not just going to be about pain that you're trying to get rid of. It's also going to be about how certain sensory experiences, within the pain network, can become amplified, as well as how we can use top-down modulation. We can use our mind, to suppress the pain response. We're also gonna talk about some of the hardwired mechanisms, that are bottom up, that exist in our periphery, in our body to control pain. And we're also gonna discuss, a number of interesting interactions between the pain system and the learning system. So again if you're, not interested in pain per se, it still is going to be a very valid conversation for sake of understanding how to optimize brain performance. And neuro-regeneration goes hand in hand, with that discussion. So I hope you'll join us for that. I suppose I'd be remiss if I didn't mention that, Costello has been snoring extremely loudly today. He had a good long walk this morning which means up the driveway down the driveway. He's an old dog. So if you've been hearing him in the background and it's been distracting, now you know why. It probably relates to, where you were on your level of autonomic arousal. And I'll leave it to you to answer that question for yourself. Many of you continue to graciously ask how you can help support the podcast. And we really appreciate the question. The best way is to subscribe wherever it is you happen to be listening or watching. So for those of you that it's YouTube, please subscribe to the YouTube channel. If it's Apple, subscribe to the podcast on Apple or if it's Spotify, subscribe there. Maybe you've subscribed to all three. If you have comments and feedback for us, suggestions for future podcast, episodes or topics to cover, please, place those in the comment section on YouTube. Apple also provides a section where you can give us a rating. We would love it if you give us a five star rating or whatever it is that you feel that we deserve. And in general, if you could tell people about the podcast, we hope that you would tell them because you think the information will be of use to them of course. Tell your friends, tell your family, tell your coworkers, because as we expand the podcast, the support for the podcast just grows along with it. So that's a terrific way to support us. As always, check out our sponsors which were mentioned at the beginning. And in addition to that, we've now set up a Patreon account. Some of you asked specifically, how you can help support the podcast but you weren't interested, in our sponsors or you were already engaged with our sponsors. So, we have a Patreon account. You can find it at patreon.com/andrewhuberman. Finally, in previous episodes today, and in future episodes, I mentioned supplements. Supplements are one way, certainly not the only way, but they're one way in which we can modulate, our nervous system, for sake of better of sleep, learning, alertness, and several other things as well. If you're interested in supplements, we've partnered with Thorne, T H O R N E, because Thorne supplements have very high stringency in terms of, what's in the bottle, the amounts of the substances that are in each capsule or pill, et cetera. And, they have partnered with other groups such as the Mayo Clinic, all the major sports teams. So there's very high rigor associated with Thorne which is why we've decided to partner with them. If you'd like to check out Thorne supplements and see the supplements that I take, you can go to Thorne, thorne.com/u/huberman. And you'll see a list of some of the supplements that I take. As well, you'll get 20% off, any of the supplements listed there, as well as anywhere else on the Thorne website. So that's Thorne, thorne.com/u/huberman, for 20% off, any Thorne supplements. Last but not least, on behalf of me and Costello, I wanna thank you for your time and attention today. And as always, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 342 ---
Video ID: hx3U64IXFOY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hx3U64IXFOY
Title: Learn Faster Using Failures, Movement & Balance
Published: 2021-02-15 13:30:06 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I discuss how we can use specific types of behavior to change our brain, both for sake of learning the movements themselves and for allowing us to learn non-movement-based information as well. I describe the key role that errors play in triggering our brains to change and how the vestibular (balance) system can activate and amplify neuroplasticity. As always, I cover science, and science-based practical tools. Thank you in advance for your questions and for your interest in science! 

#HubermanLab

For an updated list of our current sponsors, please visit our website as previous sponsors mentioned in this podcast episode may no longer be affiliated with us: https://hubermanlab.com/sponsors

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Timestamps below.
00:00 Introduction
06:20 Nerves and Muscles
12:00 Exercise alone won’t change your brain
12:58 Behavior will change your brain
13:30 Remembering the wrong things
15:00 Behavior as the gate to plasticity
15:45 Types of Plasticity
17:32 Errors Not Flow Trigger Plasticity
21:30 Mechanisms of Plasticity
22:30 What to learn when you are young
23:50 Alignment of your brain maps: neuron sandwiches
26:00 Wearing Prisms On Your Face
29:10 The KEY Trigger Plasticity
32:20 Frustration Is the Feeling to Follow (Further into Learning)
33:10 Incremental Learning 
35:30 Huberman Free Throws 
38:50 Failure Specificity Triggers Specific Plastic Changes
40:20 Triggering Rapid, Massive Plasticity Made Possible
43:25 Addiction
45:25 An Example of Ultradian-Incremental Learning
49:42 Bad Events
51:55 Surprise! 
52:00 Making Dopamine Work For You (Not The Other Way Around) 
53:20 HOW to release dopamine 
55:00 (Mental) Performance Enhancing Drugs 
56:00 Timing Your Learning
57:36 (Chem)Trails of Neuroplasticity
58:57 The Three Key Levers To Accelerate Plasticity
59:15 Limbic Friction: Finding Clear, Calm and Focused
1:04:25 The First Question To Ask Yourself Before Learning
1:05:00 Balance 
1:07:45 Cerebellum
1:10:00 Flow States Are Not The Path To Learning
1:11:18 Novelty and Instability Are Key
1:14:55 How to Arrive At Learning
1:15:45 The Other Reason Kids Learn Faster Than Adults
1:19:25 Learning French and Other Things Faster
1:22:00 Yoga versus Science
1:24:15 Closing Remarks

Please note that The Huberman Lab Podcast is distinct from Dr. Huberman's teaching and research roles at Stanford University School of Medicine. The information provided in this show is not medical advice, nor should it be taken or applied as a replacement for medical advice. The Huberman Lab Podcast, its employees, guests and affiliates assume no liability for the application of the information discussed.

[Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac https://www.blabacphoto.com/]

Transcript Language: English (United States)
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. My name is Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring you zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Headspace. Headspace is a meditation app that makes meditation easy. I've been meditating on and off now for about 30 years, although I confess more off than on. And that's because I think like, for a lot of people, sticking to a meditation practice can be pretty challenging. I started using Headspace a few years ago and I found that it's really allowed me to stick to a meditation practice on a regular basis. I meditate anywhere from five to seven times a week. The app includes meditations that are all backed by scientific peer-reviewed studies. And it makes it really easy to start and complete the meditations. I started using these meditations while I was flying a few years back. On JetBlue flights, they started offering Headspace meditations. That's where I initially started. And then I moved over to the app, and I really enjoy it and I derive great benefit from it. If you'd like to try Headspace, you can go to headspace.com/specialoffer. And if you do that, you'll get all the meditations that Headspace offers for free for one month. That's headspace.com/specialoffer. You get all the meditations for free, which is the best offer that they has available right now. So if you're interested in it, check it out. The second sponsor of today's podcast is Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I started using Athletic Greens in 2012, and I've been using it continuously ever since. I started using Athletic Greens because I found it rather dizzying to know which vitamins and minerals to take. And Athletic Greens allows me to get the full base of all the necessary vitamins and minerals in one easy to consume drink. It also turns out that the drink tastes quite good. I mix mine with some lemon juice and some water, I drink it once or twice a day. The probiotics in Athletic Greens are also important to me because there are a lot of data now supporting the fact that the gut microbiome is important for the gut-brain axis for various aspects of cognitive function, immune function, metabolic function. There's just a huge number of things that having a healthy gut microbiome has been shown to be important for. So by taking Athletic Greens, I have that base covered as well. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman. And if you do that, they'll give you a year supply of liquid vitamin D3 K2. There are also a lot of data now showing that vitamin D3 is very important for a number of different biological functions. In addition, they'll give you five free travel packs with your order. It can be difficult to mix up powders while on the road, when in a car, or in a hotel, or on a plane, et cetera. The travel packs make everything really clean and easy. So you'll get the year supply of vitamin D3 K2 plus the five free travel packs if you go to athleticgreens.com/huberman. The third sponsor of today's podcast is Madefor. Madefor is behavioral science company that makes learning positive habits and growth mindset easy. I've been involved with Madefor since the beginning as the lead of their scientific advisory. Other members of the scientific advisory include, for instance, the head of the chronobiology unit at the National Institutes of Mental Health, as well as psychiatrists from Harvard Medical School and elsewhere, all of whom are serious about science and science-related tools for developing positive habits and growth mindset. The program is a 10 month-program, during which each month you engage in a specific activity designed to encourage and cultivate positive habits and growth mindset. As well, we hold a monthly Zoom call, during which we discuss the program, people's progress, and answer any questions they have directly. If you'd like to try Madefor, you can go to getmadefor.com, and if you put Huberman in at checkout, you'll get 20% off the program. That's getmadefor.com, put Huberman in at checkout, and get 20% off the program. Today, we're going to talk about how to change your nervous system for the better. As you recall, your nervous system includes your brain and your spinal cord, but also all the connections that your brain and spinal cord make with the organs of your body and all the connections that the organs of your body make with your brain and spinal cord. This thing that we call the nervous system is responsible for everything we know, all our behavior, all our emotions, everything we feel about ourselves and the outside world, everything we think and believe. It's really at the center of our entire experience of life and who we are. Fortunately, in humans, unlike in other species, we can change our nervous system by taking some very specific and deliberate actions. And, today, we're really going to focus on the actions, the motor commands and the aspects of movement and balance that allow us to change our nervous system. It turns out that movement and balance actually provide windows or portals into our ability to change our nervous system the way we want, even if those changes are not about learning new movements or learning how to balance. And soon you'll understand why. So, today, we're going to talk a lot about the basic science of neuroplasticity. I promise to not use excessive nomenclature. There'll be a little bit, but I'll try and make it as clear as possible. And we're also going to talk a lot about protocols and tools that the scientific literature points to and support for changing our nervous system, again, not just for sake of learning new motor movements or how to balance better, but for how to feel differently about particular experiences, both past, present, and future, and as well as how to learn faster. We're not going to discuss hacks, a word I loath, we're not going to discuss gimmicks, we're going to discuss mechanism and scientific data and the tools that those mechanisms and scientific data point to so that you can tailor your practices around learning to your specific needs and goals. So let's begin by just examining the big picture question which is, does the brain control behavior? And my hope is that everyone is immediately thinking yes. The brain and nervous system, we really should say, 'cause the brain is just one component of the nervous system, controls our behavior. How does it do that? Well, there are a couple different levels that it does that. First of all, if we're talking about movement, behavior generally means movement, if we're talking about movement, we have two categories of neurons that are very important to think about in the context of neuroplasticity. First of all, we have what are called lower motor neurons. These are motor neurons that live in our spinal cord. For the aficionados out there, for those of you that might be headed to medical school or just want to learn more about the anatomy, they live in the ventral horn of the spinal cord. But that doesn't matter if you don't want to know that, just know that you have these things called lower motor neurons. These are neurons that are in the spinal cord but they extend a wire that we call an axon out into the peripheral nervous system, into the body. And those neurons connect with muscle. They send electrical potentials out there that allow our muscles to twitch into contract. As a little point of fact, actually, we don't have muscle memory. There's no such thing as muscle memory. Muscles are dumb. They don't know anything, they don't have a history, they don't have a memory, they don't know anything. It is the neurons that control those muscles and their firing patterns in which all the information for motor patterns are stored. So your ability to walk is not muscle memory, it's neural memory. Now, the lower motor neurons, while smarter than the muscle so to speak, are not the most brilliant of the motor neurons. They are generally involved in doing what they are told, and they are told what to do from two sources. We have circuits in our brainstem, so this would be kind of around your neck deep in the brain, that are called central pattern generators. These are sometimes called CPGs. Central pattern generators are what allow us to generate repetitive patterns of movement. So inhaling and exhaling, inhaling and exhaling subconsciously is controlled by a central pattern generator. That just means a collection of neurons. If you really want to know, they're called the pre-Botzinger neurons discovered by Jack Feldman and colleagues at UCLA. These neurons in the brainstem send information down the phrenic nerve and control the diaphragm. And it goes inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale. And you don't have to think about that. You could think about it and you could change the durations of inhales and exhales and change that up, but the motor neurons that control that are just responding to what the brain is telling it to do. The other central pattern generators include things like walking. The right limb-left limb, right limb-left limb pattern that we normally associate with walking was learned during childhood, and these central pattern generators, sometimes called CPGs, tell our lower motor neurons, "Fire. Now you fire, now you fire." So they are literally saying, "Right, left, right left." They are the marching orders from the brainstem to the lower motor neurons. So these lower motor neurons do what they are told. They are obedient little soldiers and they do what they are told, and their job is to make the muscles contract at specific times. Okay. That's all simple. But then there are the upper motor neurons. The upper motor neurons actually reside in our motor cortex, way up on top of the brain. And they are involved in sending signals for deliberate action. So they send signals to the lower motor neurons which are the effectors, the ones that actually control the muscles, but the upper motor neurons are the ones that send very specific signals. For instance, the signals that would allow you to make a cup of coffee in the morning or to deliberately engage in any kind of behavior. Now, you can probably make a cup of coffee in the morning without having to think about it too much. It's almost reflexive for you now, which means that a lot of the information about how to perform that particular movement has been passed off to circuitry that's now more or less in the brainstem and below the motor cortex. Now, why am I giving you all this detail? Well, if you want to change motor patterns, you have to know where in the circuitry changes are possible and you ought to know where the changes are most likely to occur. You also need to know, how do you signal to the brain and nervous system that a change is necessary? So let's just pause there, return to the initial question that we started with, which is, does the brain control behavior? And the answer is yes, and now you know how. It's upper motor neurons, lower motor neurons, you've got these things called central pattern generators and some connection with the muscle. So there you go, you just got, basically, what was the equivalent of the introduction to a college lecture on motor control and the nervous system. But the point today is all about plasticity. How can that be leveraged in order to open up this magical thing that we call plasticity in order to access changes to our emotional experience, or to our belief system, or to our ability to remember and use specific kinds of information for say math, or language, et cetera? Well, what I'm not going to tell you is that you need to go running or you need to go biking, or that simply going through motor patterns is going to open up plasticity because I hate to tell you this, but as beneficial as exercise is, it does not open plasticity unless you do certain things. And I will tell you exactly what those certain things are today. To be clear, I think exercise is wonderful and healthy, can improve cardiovascular function, maintain strength, bone density, all that good stuff. But just working out or doing your exercise of various kinds will not change your nervous system. It will maintain it, and it can certainly improve other health metrics, but it is not going to open up the window for plasticity. The question we need to ask is can behavior change the brain? We already agree that the brain can change behavior, but can behavior change the brain? And the answer is yes, provided that behavior is different enough in specific ways from the behaviors that you already know how to perform. Let me repeat that. Can behavior change the brain? And the answer is yes, provided that behavior is different enough from the sorts of behaviors that you already know how to perform. And I should've added the word well. Because you can't obviously perform a behavior that you don't know how to perform because you don't know how to do it yet. But there's a key element to accessing neuroplasticity that frankly I don't see out there in the general discussion about neuroplasticity. In the general discussion about neuroplasticity and about learning, I hear all these gimmicks about using different ways to remember lots of people's names and arranging things into their first letters and mnemonics and all this kind of stuff, which, frankly, to me feels really gimmicky. I think that if you look at super learners, they tend to be people that have a process of say extreme memory. But people who have extreme memory, generally, the literature shows us, are pretty poor at other things. I don't think most of us are interested in walking around knowing how to remember everything. In fact, there are some interesting studies looking at humans who over-remember, and they suffer tremendously because they remember all sorts of things, like the number at the top of the receipt at the bodega that they bought a Coca-Cola 10 years ago. This is useless information for most people. They don't do well in life, really. So the goal isn't to remember everything, the goal is to be selective about your brain changes. And when we talk about brain changes, I want to highlight adaptive changes. There's a whole category of things that we're going to discuss when we talk about traumatic brain injury and dementia, a topic for a future episode, about all the things that happen when you have damaged your nervous system or you're missing neurons. But, today, I really want to talk about something that I think is very near and dear to many of your hearts, which is what are the behaviors that you can engage in to access neuroplasticity so that then you can apply that plasticity to the specific things that you want to learn or unlearn. This is very important because I don't want people to get the impression that we're really talking about learning a bunch of motor movements. You may be an athlete, you might not be an athlete. You might want to learn how to dance, you might not. You might want to learn how to dance and get better at remembering and learning languages, for instance, or at unlearning some difficult emotional experience, meaning you want to remove the emotional load from a particular memory of an experience. What we're talking about today is using behavior as a gate to enter states of mind and body that allow you to access plasticity. So let's talk about the different kinds of plasticity that are available to us. Because those will point directly towards the type of protocols that we should engage in to change ourselves for the better, the so-called adaptive plasticity. There is something called representational plasticity. Representational plasticity is just your internal representation of the outside world. So you have a map of auditory space, believe it or not, meaning you have neurons that respond when something over on my right happens, like I'm [snaps fingers] snapping my fingers over to my right. I can't snap as well on my left, which is the whole thing unto itself. [snaps fingers] Yeah, weak over there on the left side. But when I do that, there are different neurons respond to those. We have a map of visual space. Certain neurons are seeing things in certain portions of visual space and not others. We have a map of motor space, meaning when we move our limbs in particular directions, we know where those limbs are because even if we can't see them, we have what's called proprioceptive feedback. So we have knowledge about where our limbs are. In fact, people that lack certain neurons for proprioceptive feedback, they are very poor at controlling their motor behavior. They get injured a lot. It's actually a terrible situation. So we've got all these representations inside and we have maps of our motor commands. We know that, for instance, if I want to reach out and grab the pen in front of me, that I need to generate a certain amount of force. So I rarely overshoot, I rarely miss the pen. Our maps of the motor world and our maps of the sensory world are merged. The way to create plasticity is to create mismatches or errors in how we perform things. And this I think is an amazing and important feature of neuroplasticity that is highly underappreciated. The way to create plasticity is to send signals to the brain that something is wrong, something is different, and something isn't being achieved. I think this will completely reframe the way that most people think about plasticity. Most of us think about plasticity as, "Okay, we're going to get into this optimal learning state or flow, and then suddenly we're going to be able to do all the things that we wish that we could do." Well, I hate to break it to you, but flow is an expression of what we already know how to do. It is not a state for learning. And I'm willing to go to bat with any of the flo-wa-nis-tas out there that want to challenge me on that one. Flow is an expression of nervous system capabilities that are already embedded in us. Errors and making errors out of sync with what we would like to do is how our nervous system is cued through very distinct biological mechanisms that something isn't going right. And, therefore, certain neurochemicals are deployed that signal the neural circuits that they have to change. So let's talk about the experiments that support what I just said. 'Cause I'm about to tell you that making errors over and over and over again is the route to shaping your nervous system so that it performs better and better and better. And I'm not going to tell you that the last rep of a set where you hit failure in the gym is anything like neuroplasticity. You hear that too that it's pushing to that point of a cliff where you just can't function anymore, that's the signal. That's not the signal. That's a distinct neuromuscular phenomenon that bears zero resemblance to what it takes to get neuroplasticity. So let's talk about errors and making errors and why and how that triggers the release of chemicals that then allow us to not just learn the thing that we're doing in the motor sense, play the piano, dance, et cetera, but it also creates an environment, a milieu within the brain, that allows us to then go learn how to couple or uncouple a particular emotion to an experience, or better language learning, or better mathematical learning. It's a really fundamental aspect of how we're built. And when you look at it, it's actually very straightforward. It's a series of logical steps that once you learn how to open those hatches, it becomes very straightforward to deploy. Last episode, we discussed some of the basic principles of neuroplasticity. If you didn't hear that episode, no problem, I'll just review it quickly, which is that it's a falsehood that everything that we do and experience changes our brain. The brain changes when certain neurochemicals, namely acetylcholine, epinephrin, and dopamine, are released in ways and in the specific times that allow for neural circuits to be marked for change. And then the change occurs later during sleep. I'll review that later, but, basically, you need a certain cocktail of chemicals released in the brain in order for a particular behavior to reshape the way that our brain works. So the question really is what allows those neurochemicals to be released? And last episode, I talked all about focus. If you haven't seen it or heard that episode, you might want to check it out, about some specific tools and practices that can allow you to build up your capacity for focus and release certain chemicals in that cocktail. But, today, we're going to talk about the other chemicals in the cocktail, in particular dopamine. And we're really going to center our discussion around this issue of making errors and why making errors is actually the signal that tells the brain, "Okay, it's time to change," or, more generally, it's time to pay attention to things so that you change. And I really want to distinguish this point really clearly, which is that I'm going to talk today a lot about motor and vestibular, meaning balance programs, but not just for learning motor commands and balance, not just for learning new motor skills and balance, but also for setting a stage or a kind of condition in your brain where you can go learn other things as well. Let's talk about some classic experiments that really nail down what's most important in this discussion about plasticity. As I mentioned last episode, and I'll just tell you right now again, the brain is incredibly plastic from about birth until about age 25. Passive experience will shape the brain just because of the way that the chemicals that are sloshing around in there and the way that the neurons are arranged and all sorts of things. The brain's job is to customize itself in response to its experience. And then somewhere about 25, it's not like the day after your 26th birthday, plasticity closes, there's a kind of tapering off of plasticity, and you need different mechanisms to engage plasticity as an adult. We're mostly going to be talking about adult plasticity today, but I got a lot of questions about, "Well, what about if I'm younger than 25?" First of all, that's great. I wish I had a time machine, but I don't. Because as I've said before, the stinger is when you're young, your brain is very plastic, but you have less control over your experience. When you're older, generally, you have more control of your experience, but your brain is less plastic. So if you're already asking the question as a 20-year-old or a 15-year-old, "What can I do now that's really going to enhanced my brain?" I guess the simple answer would be an aside, which would be get the broadest education you can possible. That means math, chemistry, physics, literature, music, learn how to play an instrument. I'm saying that 'cause I wish I had, et cetera. Get a broad training in a number of things and find the thing that really captures your passion and excitement, and then put a ton of additional effort there. That's what I recommend, including emotional development. Maybe a topic for a future episode. But if you are an adult, or if you are a young person, knowing how to tap into these plasticity mechanisms is very powerful. You need these chemicals deployed in the nervous system in order to mark whatever nerve cells happen to be firing in the time afterward for change. And people are obsessed with asking, "What supplements, what drugs, what conditions, what machines will allow for that?" But there's a natural set of conditions that allow for that. When we came into this world, we learned to take our different maps of experience, our motor maps, our auditory maps, our visual maps. And to link them, we align those maps. The simplest example is the one I gave before. If I hear something off to my right, like I click like that, it could come from my fingers snapping or it could come from something generated by somebody else or something else to my right, I look to my right. If I hear it on the left, I look to my left. If I hear it right in front of me, I keep looking right in front of me. And if I hear it behind me, I turn around. And that's because our maps of visual space and our maps of auditory space and our maps of motor space are aligned to one another in perfect register. It's an incredible feature of our nervous system. It takes place in a structure called the superior colliculus, although you don't need to know that name. Superior colliculus has layers, literally stacks of neurons like in a sandwich where the zero point right in front of me, or maybe 10 or 15 degrees off to my right or 10 or 15 degrees off to my left, are aligned so that the auditory neurons, the ones that care about sounds, at 15 degrees to my right, sit directly below the neurons that look at 15 degrees to my right in my visual system. And when I reach over to this direction, there's a signal that's sent down through those layers that says 15 degrees off to the right is the direction to look, it's the direction to listen, and it's the direction to move if I need to move. So there's an alignment. And this is really powerful. And this is what allows us to move through space and function in our lives in a really fluid way. It's set up during development. But there have been some important experiments that have revealed that these maps are plastic, meaning they can shift, they're subject to neuroplasticity. And there are specific rules that allow us to shift them. So here's the key experiment. The key experiment was done by a colleague of mine who's now retired but whose work is absolutely fundamental in the field of neuroplasticity, Eric Knudsen. The Knudsen Lab, and many of the Knudsen Lab scientific offspring, showed that if one is to wear prism glasses that shift the visual field, that eventually there'll be a shift in the representation of the auditory motor maps too. Now, what they initially did is they looked at young subjects, and what they did is they moved the visual world by making them wear prism glasses. So that, for instance, if my pen is out in front of me at five degrees off center, so just a little bit off center, if you're listening to this, this would be like just a little bit to my right, but in these prism glasses, I actually see that pen way over far on my right. So it's actually here, but I see it over there because I'm wearing prisms on my eyes. What happens is in the first day or so, you ask people or you ask animal subjects or whatever to reach for this object, and they reach to the wrong place because they're seeing it where it isn't. This gets especially complicated when you start including sounds. When you have a thing off to your right making a sound, but the thing is actually right here. So you're hearing the sound at one location and you're seeing the object at another location because you're wearing these prisms. So your image of the world is totally distorted. Or, in experiments done by other groups, they wear glasses, subjects wore glasses that completely invert the visual world so that everything is upside down, which is an extreme example of these representational maps being flipped or shifted. But what you find is that in young individuals, within a day or two, they start adjusting their motor behavior in exactly the right way so that they always reach to the correct location. So they hear a sound at one location, they see the object that ought to make that sound at a different location, and they somehow are able to adjust their motor behavior to reach to the correct location. It's incredible. It's absolutely incredible. Or, in the case of the people who would look at the world upside down, they somehow are able to navigate this upside down world even though we're completely used to our feet being on the floor and not on the ceiling and people not walking at us by hanging off the ceiling like bats. Amazing. And what it tells us is that these maps that are aligned to one another can move and shift and rotate, and even flip themselves. And it happens best in young individuals. If you do this in older individuals, in most cases, it takes a very long time for the maps to shift, and in some cases they never shift. So this is a very experimental scenario, but it's an important one to understand because it really tamps down the fact that we have the capacity to create dramatic shifts in our representation of the outside world. So how can we get plasticity as adults that mimics the plasticity that we get when we are juveniles? Well, the Knudsen Lab and other labs have looked at this, and it's really interesting. First of all, we have to ask, what is the signal for plasticity? Is it just having prism glasses on? No, because they did that experiment and ruled that out. Is it just the fact that the visual thing appears to be far over to my right when in fact it's right in front of me? No. The signal that generates the plasticity is the making of errors. It's the reaches and failures that signal to the nervous system that this is not working. And, therefore, the shifts start to take place. And this is so fundamentally important because I think most people think, "Oh, well, practice is going to be I have to access beginner's mind," which is a great concept, actually, it's about approaching things expecting to make errors, which is great. I think I am a believer in beginner's mind. But people understandably get frustrated, like they're trying to learn a piece on the piano and they can't do it, or they're trying to write a piece of code, or they're trying to access some sort of motor behavior, and they can't do it, and the frustration drives them crazy, [indistinct] "I can't do it, I can't do it," when they don't realize that [laughs] the errors themselves are signaling to the brain and nervous system, "Something's not working." And of course the brain doesn't understand the words something isn't working. The brain doesn't even understand frustration as an emotional state. The brain understands the neurochemicals that are released, namely epinephrine and acetylcholine, but also, and we'll get into this, the molecule dopamine when we start to approximate the correct behavior just a little bit, and we start getting a little bit right. So what happens is when we make errors, the nervous system kind of, I don't want to say freaks out because it's a very mechanistic and controlled situation, but the nervous system starts releasing neurotransmitters and neuromodulators that say, "We better change something in the circuitry." And so errors are the basis [laughs] for neuroplasticity and for learning. And I wish that this was more prominent out there. I guess this is why I'm saying it. And humans do not like this feeling of frustration and making errors. The few that do do exceedingly well in whatever pursuits they happen to be involved in. The ones that don't, generally don't do well. They generally don't learn much. And if you think about it, why would your nervous system ever change? Why would it ever change? Unless there was something to be afraid of, something that made us feel awful will signal that the nervous system needs to change, or there's an error in our performance. So it turns out that the feedback of these errors, the reaching to the wrong location starts to release a number of things. And now you've heard about them many times, but this would be epinephrin. It increases alertness, acetylcholine, focus. And this is why frustration that leads us to just kind of quit and walk away from the endeavor is the absolute worst thing. Because if acetylcholine is released, it creates an opportunity to focus on the error margin, the distance between what it is that you're doing and what it is that you would like to do. And then the nervous system starts to make changes almost immediately in order to try and get the behavior right. And when you start getting it even a little bit right, that third molecule comes online or is released, which is dopamine, which allows for the plastic changes to occur very fast. Now, this is what all happens very naturally in young brains. But in old brains, it tends to be pretty slow, except for in two conditions. So let me just pause and just say this, if you are uncomfortable making errors and you get frustrated easily, if you leverage that frustration toward drilling deeper into the endeavor, you are setting yourself up for a terrific set of plasticity mechanisms to engage. But if you take that frustration and you walk away from the endeavor, you are essentially setting up plasticity to rewire you according to what happens afterwards, which is generally feeling pretty miserable. So now you can kind of start to appreciate why it is that continuing to drill into a process to the point of frustration but then staying with that process for a little bit longer, and I'll define exactly what I mean by a little bit, is the most important thing for adult learning as well as childhood learning, but adult learning in particular. Now, the Knudsen Lab did two very important sets of experiments. The first one was published in "Nature,' very important study, which showed that juveniles can make these massive shifts in their map representations, meaning you can shift the visual world using visual prisms a huge amount and very quickly. Young individuals can shift their representations of the world so that they learn to reach to the correct location. They get a lot of plasticity all at once, and it happens very fast in a period of just a couple days. In adults, it tends to be very slow and most individuals never actually accomplish the full map shift. They don't get the plasticity. Here we're talking about map shifts, but this could be learning a new language, this could be any number of different things that [indistinct] we're attempting. So what we're saying is what I already said before, which is that we learn very well as youngsters, but not as adults after 25. But then what they did is they started making the increment of change smaller. So instead of shifting the world a huge amount by putting prisms that shifted that the visual world all the way over to the right, they did this incrementally. So, first, they put on prisms that shifted it just a little bit, just like seven degrees I believe was the exact number. And then it was 14 degrees, and then it was 28 degrees. And so what they found was that the adult nervous system can tolerate smaller and smaller errors over time, but that you can stack those errors so that you can get a lot of plasticity. Put simply, incremental learning as an adult is absolutely essential. You are not going to get massive shifts in your representation to the outside world. So how do you make small errors as opposed to big errors? Well, the key is smaller bouts of focused learning for smaller bits of information. It's a mistake to try and learn a lot of information in one learning about as an adult. What these papers from the Knudsen Lab show, and what others have gone on to show, is that the adult nervous system is fully capable of engaging in a huge amount of plasticity, but you need to do it in smaller increments per learning epoch or per learning episode. So how would you do this? Well, say for instance, I'm terrible at free throws, so let's say I wanted to learn free throws. I'm 45 years old, so I'm well past the 25 and under mark. I'm going to make errors. I'm going to make a lot errors. If I go into learning free throws knowing that errors are the gate to plasticity, well, then I feel a little bit better, but I still have to aim for the rim of the basket or the net. Basically, showing how little I know about basketball. But I think I know the general themes around basketball, involves a net, a back board, and a ball, of course. So I go to the free throw line and I'll throw. How long should I go? Well, until I'm hitting the point of frustration. And at that point, continuing probably for anywhere from 10 to 100 more trials should be my limit, right? That should be my limit if I want to improve some specific aspect of the motor behavior. And so the question then is what should I be paying attention to? What should I be focusing on? Well, obviously trying to get the ball into the basket. But the beauty of motor learning is that the circuits for auditory and visual and motor more or less teach themselves. I don't necessarily have to be paying attention to exactly the contact of my fingers with the ball or some random feature like whether or not I'm bending my knees or not. The key is to try a number of different parameters until I start to approximate the behavior that I want to get a little bit better, and then trying to get consistent about that. Now, many of you involved in sports learning will say, "Okay, well, that's obvious, it's just incremental learning." But the key thing is in those errors. By isolating the errors and making a number of errors in a particular aspect of the motor movement, it signals to the brain that it's plastic. And if I leave that episode of going and trying to learn how to shoot free throws, my brain is still plastic. Plasticity is a state of the brain and nervous system. It's not just geared toward the specific thing I'm trying to learn. So there are two aspects to plasticity that I think we really need to highlight. One is that there's plasticity geared toward the thing that you are trying to learn specifically. And then there are states of mind and body that allow us to access plasticity. Now, toward the end of this episode, I'm going to spell out specific protocols in a little more detail. That free throw example might not correlate with what you want to learn. Actually, I don't have a huge desire to learn free throws. I've more or less given up on basketball, and free throws in particular. But I think that it's important to understand that motor movements are the most straightforward way to access states of plasticity. And that can be for sake of learning the motor movement or for sake of accessing plasticity more generally. One very important aspect to getting plasticity as an adult is not just smaller increments, meaning shorter bouts. So I gave an example of another 100 free throws or something, but going out there and just getting 10,000 free throws all at once or packing as much as I can into one episode is not going to be as efficient for me as shorter bouts of intense learning as an adult. Because the error signals are not as well-defined to my nervous system. It's not going to know what needs to change. And so this is really the key element of incremental learning, is that you're trying to signal to the nervous system at least one component that needs to change. The nervous system needs to know what the error is. Now, when I shoot free throws, Lord knows there are a lot of different kinds of errors that happen, probably the way I'm bending my knees, the arc of the ball, the way I'm organizing my shoulders, probably where my eyes are, lots of things. So which ones to focus on? And that's what I said before, the beauty of the motor system is I don't have to worry about all of that. I just need to get the reps in a number of times, and the nervous system will figure out how far off my motor commands are, at the level of these maps that I described earlier, how far those deviate from the desired behavior, getting the ball into the basket, and it will start making adjustments. But as I make adjustments, or as my nervous system makes adjustments for me, the key thing is to not start adding a variety of new errors because then it gets confused. And so this is why short learning bouts are absolutely essential. So let's say it's for learning an instrument as an adult. Probably anywhere from 7 minutes to 30 minutes, provided that you're fully attending, you're very focused, is going to be a pretty significant stimulus to inspire plasticity in the nervous system. Now, there is one way to get a lot of plasticity all at once as an adult. There is that kind of Holy Grail thing of getting massive plasticity as you would when you were a young person but as an adult. And the Knudsen Lab revealed this by setting a very serious contingency on the learning. What they did was they had a situation where subjects had to find food that was displaced in their visual world, again, by putting prisms, and they had to find the food, and the food made a noise, there was a noise set to kind of the location of the food through an array of speakers. Basically, what they found was that if people have to adjust their visual world in order to get food, the plasticity would eventually occur, but it was very slow as an adult. It was very, very slow. Unless they actually had to hunt that food. In order to eat at all, they needed plasticity. And then what happened was remarkable. What they observed is that the plasticity as an adult can be as dramatic, as robust as it is in a young person or in a young animal subject, provided that there's a serious incentive for the plasticity to occur. And this is absolutely important to understand, which is that how badly we need or want the plasticity determines how fast that plasticity will arrive, which is incredible because the brain is just neurons and soup of chemicals. But this means that the importance of something, how important something is to us, actually gates the rate of plasticity and the magnitude of plasticity. And this is why just passively going through most things, going through the motions, as we say, or just getting our reps in quote, unquote, is not sufficient to get the nervous system to change. This study, a beautiful study, published in the journal of neuroscience shows that if we actually have to accomplish something in order to eat or in order to get our ration of income, we will reshape our nervous system very, very quickly. So the nervous system has a capacity to change at a tremendous rate, to an enormous degree at any stage of life provided it's important enough that that happen. And I think some of you might be saying, "Well, duh, that's obvious. If it's really crucial, then, of course, it's going to change faster." But it didn't have to be that way. And for most people who are trying to learn how to learn faster or learn better, they probably, in most cases, they are hitting a limit because the need to change is not crucial enough. And I think there are a number of places where this has important relevance in the people who are battling addiction, for instance. I will be the first to say that I sympathize with the fact that addictions have a biological component. There's clearly cases where people struggle tremendously to change their behavior and their nervous system, in some cases, is so disrupted by whatever substance they've been abusing or behavior that they've been engaging in, that it's that much harder for them to change. But we've also seen incredible examples where when people have to change from an internal standpoint, from their own belief and desire to change, that massive change is possible. And so I think that the studies that Knudsen did showing the incremental learning can create a huge degree of plasticity as an adult as well as when the contingency is very high, meaning we need to eat, or we need to make an income, or we need to do something that's vitally important for us, that plasticity can happen in these enormous leaps just like they can in adolescence and young adulthood. That points to the fact that it has to be a neurochemical system. There has to be an underlying mechanism. This wasn't a case of sticking a wire into the brain or taking a particular drug. All the chemicals that we're about to talk about are released from drugstores, if you will, [laughs] chemical stores that already reside in all of our brains. And the key is how to tap into those stores. And so we're going to next talk about what are the specific behaviors that liberate particular categories of chemicals that allow us to make the most of incremental learning and that set the stage for plasticity that is similar enough or mimics these high contingency states, like the need to get food, or really create a sense of internal urgency, chemical urgency, if you will. If you've heard previous episodes of this podcast, you may have heard me talk about ultradian rhythm, which are these 90-minute rhythms that break up our 24-hour day. They help break up our sleep into different cycles of sleep like REM sleep and non-REM sleep. They break up our day in ways that allow us to learn best within 90-minute cycles, et cetera. So some of you might be saying, "Wait, you've been talking about ultradian cycles, and a moment ago you were talking about 7-minute or 12-minute or 30-minute learning cycles. Today, we're really talking about how to tap into plasticity through the completion of a task or working towards something repetitively and making errors. And so just to frame this in the context of the ultradian cycle, you might sit down, decide that you're going to learn conversational French, which would mean that you probably don't already speak French. So you're going to sit down, you're going to decide you're going to learn some nouns and some verbs, you might do some practice set. The ultradian cycle says that for the first 5 to 10 minutes of doing that, your mind is going to drift and your focus will probably kick in, provided that you're restricting your visual world to just the material in front of you, something we talked about last episode, somewhere around the 10 or 15-minute mark. And then at best you're probably going to get about an hour of a deliberate kind of tunnel vision learning in there. Your mind will drift. And then toward the end of that, what is now an hour and 10 or hour and 20 minute cycle, your brain will sort of start to flicker in and out, you might start thinking about what you need to eat or the fact that you have to use the bathroom or something. And then by 90 minutes, it's probably time to just stop the learning about and go do something else, maybe return for a second learning about later, maybe take a nap afterwards or something to enhance the learning. It's going to happen within about a 90-minute block. You're going to go through that cycle of learning. But when I refer to the 7 or 12 or 30 minutes of making errors, what I mean is when you're really in a mode of repeating errors, not deliberately, you're trying your best to accomplish something, and you're failing. You're absolutely failing. You're trying to remember say the sign language alphabet. I was trying to teach myself this recently, and then I keep repeating and repeating, and then get to a certain point where I kept making errors, making errors, making errors. You want to keep making errors for this period of time that I'm saying will last anywhere for about 7 to 30 minutes. It is exceedingly frustrating, but that frustration, it liberates the chemical cues that signal that plasticity needs to happen and they also signal the particular neurons that are active. So in the case of sign language, it might be the ones that control my hand movements as well as me thinking about what the different letters are. It's signaling different opponents within the networks between the brain and body, and it's trying to figure out, "Wait, where are these errors coming from? Where are the errors coming from? Ah, it's those neurons, they're making the mistakes. They're making the mistakes, they're making the mistakes." And it essentially highlights that pathway for change. And it is the case that when we come back a day or two later in a learning about after a nap or a night or two of deep rest, then what we find is that we can remember certain things and the motor pathways work. And we don't always get it perfectly, but we get a lot of it right. Whereas, we got it wrong before. So that 7 to 30-minute intense learning about is within the ultradian cycle, and I want to be clear about that. And some people can tolerate many of these per day. Most people can only tolerate one or two, maybe three. This is intense work. If shooting free throws, you could probably do it all day. But what I'm talking about is really trying to accelerate plasticity by having a period of the 7 to 30 minutes per learning about that is specifically about making errors. I want to really underscore that. And it's not about, as I mentioned before, coming up with some little hack or trick or something of that sort. It's really about trying to cue the nervous system that something needs to change because otherwise it simply won't change. Now, there's another aspect to learning, I think it's only fair to mention, which is that we can all learn very easily when there's something very bad happens to us. I don't wish this on anyone, but it is the case that if something really terrible happens that we will have a lifetime memory for that event. There are processes that allow us to uncouple the emotional load of that event. I talked about some of those a few episodes back, the episode on dreams, trauma, and hallucinations. And we're going to return to trauma release, PTSD, and some of those other themes in a future episode. But the reason why negative experiences can be wired into us so quickly is because our nervous system's main job is to keep us safe, but at a deeper level, it's because negative experiences cue us to the fact that whatever's happening that's really bad is very different than the other things that tend to happen before. Most of our experience doesn't remap us, but those negative experiences deploy high levels of norepinephrine, high levels of acetylcholine, and really make so that whatever it is that we experienced in that bad episode is essentially queued up, and so we're on the lookout for it. And this has a number of negative effects in terms of psychological and emotional effects, but it is really a process designed to keep us safe. The other ways in which we can learn more quickly besides just making errors is when something really surprises us. And if we're positively surprised by something or we are just flooded with this molecule dopamine, then there's a great opportunity for plasticity. Dopamine is a molecule that's almost always associated with pleasure and with the accomplishment of a particular goal, but it's really also a molecule of motivation. It's a molecule that is released inside of us when we think we're on the right path. And it does have a capacity to increase neuroplasticity, motivation, et cetera. It's released in response to a number of natural behaviors, just that help with the progression of ours and other species, things like food, sex, in some sense social connection, although that's more serotonin, and serotonin doesn't have the same effects on plasticity quite the same. And we'll talk about a few later. But dopamine is when we think we're on the right path toward an external goal, a little bit is released and it tends to give us more motivation toward that goal. I think everyone could stand to enhance the rate of learning by doing the following. Learn to attach dopamine, in a subjective way, to this process of making errors. Because that's really combining two modes of plasticity in ways that together can accelerate the plasticity. So, earlier, I talked about making errors and having a focus about of learning that includes making a lot of errors inside of that learning about. That is going to be frustrating, but the frustration itself is the cue, and epinephrine will be very high under those conditions. But if you can just subjectively associate that experience with something good and that you want to continue down that path as opposed to quitting when you hit the point of frustration, well then you now start to create a synergy between the dopamine that's released when we subjectively think something is good, or tell ourselves something is good, and that situation of making failures. In other words, making failing repetitively, provided we're engaged in a very specific set of behaviors when we do it, as well as telling ourselves that those failures are good for learning and good for us, creates an outsize effect on the rate of plasticity. It accelerates plasticity. Now, some of you might be asking, and I get asked a lot, "Well, how do I get dopamine to be released? And can I just tell myself that something is good when it's bad?" Well, actually yes, believe it or not. The thing about dopamine is it's highly subjective. What's funny to one person is not necessarily funny to the next. So it has to have some sense of authenticity for you. But if you really want to be learning the thing that you're trying to learn, that should be reason enough to tell yourself, "Well, I'm frustrated, but the frustration is the source of accelerated learning." Dopamine is one of these incredible molecules that both can be released according to things that are hardwired in us to release dopamine. Again, things like food, sex, warmth when we're cold, cool environments when we're too warm. It's that kind of pleasure molecule overall. But it's also highly subjective what releases dopamine in one person versus the next. Everyone releases dopamine in response to those very basic kind of behaviors and activities, but dopamine is also released according to what we subjectively believe is good for us. And that's what's so powerful about it. In fact, a book that I highly recommend, if you want to read more about dopamine, is a book that frankly I wish I had written, it's such a wonderful book, it's called "The Molecule of More." And it really talks about dopamine not just as a molecule associated with reward, but a molecule associated with motivation and pursuit, and just how subjectively controlled dopamine can be. So make lots of errors, tell yourself that those errors are important and good for your overall learning goals, so learn to attach dopamine, meaning release dopamine in your brain when you start to make errors, keep the bouts of learning relatively short if you're an adult. Younger people can probably engage in more bouts of learning. And it's probably one of the reasons why they learn so much faster. They can just pack so much more information into the brains and nervous systems compared to adults. It's a little bit like, I'll use the example of performance-enhancing drugs. Some of those drugs probably do enhance performance at the level of increasing red blood cell count, et cetera. But a lot of what those drugs do is they allow athletes to recover faster so they can just train more. They allow them to do more work. And so being a child is a little bit like being in a performance enhanced brain milieu. Their brains are kind of on natural, healthy neurochemicals that afford them a lot more learning should they pursue it. So this goes back to my advice for young people early on. If you're young, what should you do? Learn as much as you can about as many things as you possibly can. And I suggest specializing in something. I guess I'm not in a position to give anyone direct advice, but I would say, hopefully, by about age 30, hopefully younger, you have some sense of what excites you and try and get really good at that thing, provided it serves the world for better. But that's all I'll say in terms of parenting advice. It's not my place. But maybe sometime I'll have an episode completely devoted to sort of youth and learning in youth. But once you're attaching dopamine to this process of making errors, then I start getting lots of questions that really are the right questions, which are, how often should I do this? And when should I be doing this and at what time? Well, I've talked a little bit about this in previous episodes, but as long as we're now kind of into the nitty-gritty of tools and application, each of us have some natural times throughout the day when we are going to be much better at tolerating these errors and much more focused on what it is that we're trying to do. Last episode was about focus, but chances are that you can't focus as well at 4:00 pm as you can at 10:00 am. It differs for everybody depending on when you're sleeping and your kind of natural chemistry and rhythms. But find the time or times of day when you naturally have the highest mental acuity, and that's really when you want to engage in these learning bouts. And then get to the point where you're making errors and then keep making errors for 7 to 30 minutes. Just keep making those errors and drill through it. And you're almost seeking frustration. And if you can find some pleasure in the frustration, yes, that is a state that exists, you have created the optimal neurochemical milieu for learning that thing. But then here's the beauty of it, you also have created the optimal milieu for learning other things afterward. If you leave that about of, I gave the example of free throws, or maybe it's playing tennis, or maybe it's some other skill, and you sit down to read a book, your brain is in a heightened state to learn and retain the information. Because those chemicals don't get released and then shut down. You're creating a whole milieu, an environment of these chemicals. And the tale of how long these chemicals stay sloshing around in your brain has too many factors for me to put a hard number on it. It's going to depend on transporters and enzymes and all sorts of things. But at least for an hour or so I would say, you're going to be in a state of heightened learning, and the ability to learn, not just the motor patterns but cognitive information, language information, maybe you go to therapy right after that and you work on something in a very deliberate way that you're trying to work on, maybe you don't go to therapy, maybe you do something else that's important to you. Again, there are just a variety of examples I could give. There are a number of things that allow us to powerfully access these states of error that are kind of surprising but also kind of fun. Again, these aren't gimmicks, these tap into these basic mechanisms of plasticity. And the three that I'd like to talk about next are balance, meaning the vestibular system, as well as the two sides of what I call limbic friction or autonomic arousal. And if none of that makes sense, I'm going to put a fine point on each one of those and what it is and why it works for opening up neuroplasticity. Let's talk about limbic friction. Now, limbic friction is not a term you're going to find in the textbooks. So if any of my colleagues are listening, I want to repeat limbic friction, I realize is not something you're going to find in any of the textbooks. But it is an important principle that captures a lot of information that is in textbooks, both neurobiology and psychology, and it has some really important implications. Limbic friction is my attempt to give a name to something that is more nuanced and mechanistic than stress. Because, typically, when we hear about stress, we think of heart rate, heartbeat going too fast, breathing too fast, sweating, and not being in a state that we want, we're to alert and we want to be more calm. And, indeed, that's one condition in which we have limbic friction, meaning our limbic system is taking control of a number of different aspects of our autonomic or automatic biology. And we are struggling to control that through what we call top-down mechanisms. We're trying to calm down in order to reduce that level of arousal. We're all familiar with this, it's called the stress response. However, there's another aspect of stress that's just as important, which is when we're tired and we're fatigued and we need to engage, we need to be more alert than we are. And so what I call limbic friction is really designed to describe the fact that when our autonomic nervous system isn't where we want it, meaning we're trying to be more alert or we're trying to be less alert, both of those feel stressful to people. The other way to put it is that the word stress is not a very good word to describe what most people experience as stressful because it can either be being too tired or being too alert. Now, why am I bringing this up in a discussion about neuroplasticity? This is not a discussion about stress. At some point, we will talk about stress and tools to deal with stress. But the reason I'm bringing this up is that in order to access neuroplasticity, you need these components of focus, you need the component of attaching subjective reward, you need to make errors, all this stuff. And a lot of people find it difficult to just get into the overall state to access those things. So now there's a series of gates that people are having a hard time accessing. They're too tired and they can't focus, for instance. Well, here's the beauty of it. If you are too alert, meaning you're too anxious, and you want to calm down in order to learn better, there are things that you can do. The two that I've spoken about previously on various podcasts, and I'll just review them really quickly, are the double inhale exhale. So inhaling twice through the nose and exhaling once through the mouth. This is not some yoga trick or some hack. This is what's called a physiological sigh. It offloads carbon dioxide from the lungs, it has a number of different effects. These were described in textbooks dating back to the 30s and a number of laboratories have explored the neurocircuitry underlying these so-called physiological sighs. That will calm you down faster than anything else that I'm aware of. The other thing is starting to remove your tunnel vision. When you use tunnel vision, you're very focused, that epinephrine up is released by dilating your field of gaze, so-called panoramic vision. Great, so now you can start to sort of move up and down this level of autonomic arousal. The key is you want to be in a state of arousal that's ideally matched to the thing that you're trying to perform or learn. So if I'm really anxious and I can't even pick up the basketball or I feel like I'm shaking or my muscles are too tight, I don't have that kind of looseness, when I move like that, it almost makes it look like I could throw a free throw, but I miss 95% of the time, unless the basket is very, very low and I place it in directly. I guess that's not a free throw, is it? [laughs] In any case, the point being that you want to be in a state of alertness but calm. And so you need to have ways to calm yourself down when you're too amped up. But the other side of limbic friction is important too. If you are too tired and you can't focus, well, then it's going to be impossible to even get to the starting line, so to speak, for engaging in neuroplasticity through incremental learning, et cetera. So in that case, there are other methods that you can do to wake yourself up. The best thing you should do is get a good night's sleep, but that's not always possible, or use a NSDR, non-sleep deep rest protocol. But if you've already done those things or you're simply exhausted for whatever other reason, then there are other things that I often get asked about, like sure a cup of coffee or super oxygenation breathing, which means inhaling more than exhaling on average in a breathing about. Now we're sort of getting toward the realm of like how you could trick your nervous system into waking up. And if you bring more oxygen in by making your inhales deeper and longer, you will become more alert. You'll start to actually deploy norepinephrine if you breathe very fast. So there are things that you can do to move up or down this so-called autonomic arousal arc. And what you want to ask before you undergo any learning about is how much limbic friction am I experiencing? Am I too alert and I want to be calmer, or am I too calm and too sleepy and I want to be more alert? You're going to need to engage in behaviors that bring you to the starting line in order to learn. There are other things that you can do in order to then learn better and faster besides incremental learning, and those center on the vestibular system. And this may come as a surprise to some people, but probably not as a surprise to some of you whose professions or whose recreation involves a lot of motor activity and sort of what we call high dimensional skill activity, not just running or cycling or very linear activities like weightlifting, but things that involve inversions and a lot of lateral movement, actual sports, jumping, diving, rolling, these kinds of things, gymnastics type stuff. Why the vestibular system to access neuroplasticity? Well, we have a hardwired system for balance, and here's how it works in as simple terms as I can possibly come up with. As we move through space, or even if we're stationary, there are really three main planes of movement. Now, I realize some people are just listening to this, so I'm going to do this for both the folks that are just listening and for those of you that are watching on video. So there are three main modes of movement. And it turns out that your brain doesn't really know where your body is, except through that proprioceptive feedback. The main way it knows is through three planes of movement that we call pitch, which is like nodding. So if I nod like this, that's pitch. Then there's yaw, which is side to side, which is like shaking my head no. And then there's roll from side to side like when a puppy looks at you, like mm-mmm, that kind of thing. So pitch, yaw, and roll. And the pilots out there will know exactly what I'm talking about. The brain knows the orientation and position of your body relative to gravity, depending on whether or not your brain in your head actually is engaging more in pitch, yaw, or roll, or some combination because if I lean down like so or like so, it's a combination of pitch, yaw, and roll. You might say like, "What is going on here?" Well, we have these little things in our inner ear called the semicircular canals. Just like our eyes have two main functions, one is to see objects in space and the other is to set our circadian clocks through subconscious mechanisms, our ears have two main roles. One is to hear, to perceive sound waves or take in sound waves for perception, so-called hearing, and the other is balance or vestibular function. So sitting in our ears are these semicircular canals, and they're these little tubes where these little stones, they're actually little bits of calcium, roll back and forth like little marbles. When we roll this way, they roll this way, when we pitch. When we go from side to side, there's some that sit flat like this and they go [makes swishing sound] like marbles inside of a hula hoop. And then we have roll, there's some that are kind of at 45 degrees to those and it's kind of pitchy on roll. Okay, great. That sends signals to the rest of our brain and body that tell us how to compensate for shifts relative to gravity. And you say, "Okay, I thought we were talking about plasticity." But this is where it gets really, really cool. Errors in vestibular motor sensory experience, meaning when we are off-balance and we have to compensate by looking at, thinking about, or responding to the world differently cause an area of our brain called the cerebellum, it actually means mini brain, it looks like a little mini brain like tucked below our cortex in the back, cause the cerebellum to signal some of these deeper brain centers that release dopamine, norepinephrine, and acetylcholine. And that's because these circuits in the inner ear, et cetera, and the cerebellum, they were designed to recalibrate our motor movements when our relationship to gravity changes. Something fundamental to survival. We can't afford to be falling down all the time or missing things that we grab for, or running in the wrong direction when something is pursuing us. These are hardwired circuits that tap right into these chemical pathways. And those chemical pathways are the gates to plasticity. So I really want to spell this out clearly 'cause I've given a lot of information today. The first thing is, how are you arriving to the learning about? You need to make sure your level of autonomic arousal is correct. The ideal state is going to be clear, calm, and focused, maybe a little bit more on the arousal level, like heightened arousal. So understand limbic friction, understand that you can be too tired, in which case you're going to need to get yourself more alert, or you can be too alert and you're going to need to get yourself calmer. That gets you to the starting line. When you're at the starting line, then you're going to go into a learning about, and that's when you want to start making these errors. But what I'm saying is there's a layer in between where if you are interested in using motor patterns as a way to open up plasticity for all kinds of learning, not just motor learning, disrupting your vestibular motor relationship, and I'll tell you how to do that in a moment, can deploy or release neurochemicals in the brain that place you into a state that makes you much better at learning and makes making errors much more pleasureful, you're much more willing to do that. Now, some of you are probably saying, "Flow state, flow state." Okay, I have friends that work on flow states and who are involved in flow states and trying to figure out what they are. I have great respect for those people. I want to tip my hat to them. Very important work. But, again, flow is an expression of what you already know how to do. It's not how you learn, it's how you express what you've already learned. I want to be really clear about that. It's been kind of presented as this super state or highly desirable state that we can all reach for. That's the wrong [indistinct] to reach for until you already know how to do the things that I'm describing, in my opinion. So the vestibular system, if you can engage the vestibular system and create some errors within the vestibular motor operations that you're carrying out, you create a neurochemical state that then makes you very, very good at learning very quickly regardless of age. So what would this look like? Does this mean just doing inversions? Does this mean doing yoga? Maybe. Does this mean taking corners faster on your road bike? Let's say you always swim freestyle or breaststroke, does this mean swimming backstroke or butterfly? It depends. It depends, however, on a very, very easy to understand parameter, which is how regularly you perform a particular motor behavior and how novel a behavior is. So the more novel that a behavior is in terms of your relationship to gravity, the more it will open up the opportunity for plasticity. Have you ever seen somebody who just jumped out of a plane for the first time with a parachute? [laughs] I don't even want to think about what, if you've just seen somebody who jumped out of a plane for the first time without a parachute, I just hope the plane was on the ground. But if you seen somebody after that, they are in this incredible state because their body and brain are flooded with all these neurochemicals because it's very novel to them. However, I've got friends from communities that have done thousands upon thousands, maybe tens of thousands of jumps, and they're always alert and aware, but it becomes pretty regular for them. That's the point. And they're not in this kind of buzzed out, excited state afterwards because it's routine for them. The key is to bring novelty to the vestibular motor experience, the vestibular motor commands that you're performing. How do you do that? Well, it's all about your orientation relative to gravity. Now, I wouldn't want anyone to place themselves at risk. So if you can't do handstands, don't try and do them, freestanding and whatever. If you're good at handstands, guess how much plasticity doing handstands for half an hour is going to create for you. Zero. Zero. Your body is fully comfortable walking on your hands. I see these people walking on your hands, being upside down, being inverted. Your Cirque du Soleil performers, they're very comfortable there, and there is zero learning, zero plasticity because the failures and errors and the relationship to gravity are very typical for that individual. Now, what this means is that if we're going to use motor practices to open up plasticity for learning, not just those practices, but maybe some cognitive skills or other things in the period that follows, we need to create a sense of novelty relative to gravity. And that means being either in a new position or slightly unstable. Believe it or not, I don't want anyone injuring themselves, but the sensation of falling or close to falling signals the cerebellum to signal the deep brain centers that release these neurochemicals that something is very different and we need to correct this error very, very fast. Now, earlier, I was talking about high contingencies for learning, and you definitely don't want to make it a kind of like either survive this or die kind of experience. I confess, I occasionally look at these parkour videos on YouTube. Believe it or not, a lot of those people have died, the ones that do these ridiculous things of hanging off of buildings and things. I am not suggesting you do that. Please don't do that. What I'm talking about is finding safe ways to explore the sensory motor vestibular space, as we call it, the relationship between those things. So that could be through yoga. If you're terrible at yoga, there's more opportunity for you to learn than somebody who's very skilled at yoga, for instance, or gymnastics, or handstands, or on your road bike. This is, unfortunately, what, I don't want to name brands, but stationary bikes where they give you the visual experience of moving through space, but you're not actually moving through physical space, there's no vestibular feedback. It's all visual. You're stationary on the bike. So unless you're hanging off the bike in your living room like almost to the point you're tipping the bike, you're not getting the actual vestibular motor sensory mismatch. That mismatch is the signal that deploys dopamine, epinephrin, and these other things. I don't care how excited or how much fun the ride was or how much music you're playing that you love, it's not the same situation as being out of your normal relationship to the gravitational pull. So the first gate is to arrive at learning at the appropriate level of autonomic arousal. Clear and focused is best, but don't obsess over being right there, it's okay. If you're a little anxious or a little bit tired, then you want to make errors. We talked about that, and this vestibular motor sensory relationship is absolutely key if you want to get heightened or accelerated plasticity. And we talked about another feature, which is setting a contingency. If there's a reason, an important reason for you to actually learn, even if you're making failures, the learning will be accelerated. So there's really four things that you really need to do for plasticity as an adult. And I would say that these also apply to young people. And there's an interesting kind of a thought experiment there as well, which is if you look at children, they are moving a lot in different dimensions. They are sometimes hanging from trees. My sports were always things where I tended to get hurt a lot, fall a lot. So it's skateboarding for me when I was younger, so a lot of falling and rolling and various things of that sort. But whatever sport the kids are playing, or even if they don't play a sport, they tend to move in a lot of different relationships to gravity, more dimensionality to their movements I should say, than adults. And one of the questions that's always kind of been in the back of my mind is, as we age we get less good at engaging in neuroplasticity. Part of that is because as the brain ages there are certain changes to the way that neurons are structured, their molecular components, et cetera. But it's kind of a self-amplifying, or I should say self-degenerating cycle where as we get older, we tend to get more linear and more regular about specific kinds of movements. So we'd get on the treadmill, or we take the walk, or we just always go up the same stairs, et cetera. And there's less opportunity, typically, for engaging these relationships to the gravitational pull through the vestibular motor sensory convergence that we talked about a moment ago. And so you sort of have to wonder whether or not the lack of plasticity or the reduced plasticity in older individuals, which includes me, would reflect the fact that those chemicals aren't being deployed because we're not engaging in certain behaviors as opposed to we can't engage in the behaviors because the chemicals aren't being deployed. Now, I have a feeling it's both. These have a reciprocal relationship. And I certainly, again, I don't think it would be wise for anyone who doesn't have the muscle stabilizing skills or the bone density, et cetera, to start doing inversions and things of that sort. That's not what I'm talking about here. But it's interesting to think about the sorts of exercise that we engage in. We all know that getting the heart rate elevated three to five times a week is really good for us for cardiovascular health. I think there's a ton of data to support that now. Some load-bearing exercise is important for increasing bone density and maintaining muscular strength and proprioceptive feedback. Because, I'm sure many of you know this, but resistance exercise actually trains the nerve to muscle connections as much as it does the muscles themselves. Something I talked about at the beginning of the episode. But I think most of us could stand to increase the degree to which we engage this vestibular system in novel ways. And that can be done quite safely through a number of different mechanisms. I'm not a surfer, but people who do that sort of thing are very familiar with orienting their body differently according to the gravitational pull. They're lying down, then they're standing up, then they're turning, they're leaning their head. So, again, it's this pitch, yaw, roll thing. And, again, if you're very skilled at surfing, you're actually not going to open up plasticity just by surfing. It's in the learning of these new relationships to gravity that the windows for plasticity are enhanced. I want to make sure that I underscore the fact that this vestibular thing that I've been describing is a way to really accentuate plasticity. It's tapping into an inborn biological mechanism where the cerebellum has outputs to these deep brain nuclei associated with dopamine, acetylcholine, and norepinephrine. You don't want to endanger yourself in the course of pursuing these activities, but it is a powerful mechanism. That's kind of an amplifier on plasticity, as is high contingency. If you really need to learn conversational French to save your relationship, the chances are you're going to learn it. There are limits, of course, to the extent to which one can accentuate or accelerate plasticity. The ceiling on this is not infinite, although we don't know how high it goes. I think it's reasonable to say that if someone put a gun to my head and said, "Learn conversational French in the next 120 seconds," that conversational French will be limited probably to just one word, probably the word oui or something like that. Because I can't stuff in all the knowledge all at once. I think that's the dream of brain-machine interface, that one will be able to download a chip into their hippocampus or cortex, or some other brain structure that would allow them to download conversational French. And someday we may get to that, that capability may come about. Right now, it does not exist, nor is there a specific pill or chemical that will allow you to download more information more quickly. This is the issue around nootropics I've talked about before. There are things that can increase focus, mainly things that increase acetylcholine and transmission through the nicotine system, things that can increase dopamine, things like L-tyrosine. Again, I'm not recommending these. You need to heed the warnings on those bottles, but they will increase these neurochemicals. And there are, of course, things that will increase epinephrin, things like caffeine, or some people, because of prescription, take Adderall. I'm, again, not suggesting people take any of these things. In fact, today I focused almost exclusively on behavioral tools and ways of structuring learning bouts that will allow you to access more plasticity regardless of age. And they center around things that I'm sure if you look around you you'll see evidence for, "Oh, incremental learning is powerful," or, "Oh, the vestibular system can open up opportunities for plasticity." I'm sure that the yogis out there all saying, "Wait, this sounds exactly like yoga. We're supposed to push to an edge and do these inversions and do all those sorts of things." Well, I want to be clear, I never said anyone should do inversions. I said that the vestibular system is a valuable portal into some of these neurochemical states that favor plasticity. But not so seldom, I hear from the yoga community, and they will say things like, "Much of what you're saying about how the brain works or neuroplasticity has already been described or is embedded in yoga practices." And I just want to be very clear, I have tremendous respect for the yoga community and the practices, I've done yoga from time to time, I find it challenging and valuable. I'm not a regular practitioner. But the problem with yoga is exactly the same problem with science, which is that yoga has a lot of practices for which there are very specific names, but no description or lending of understanding about mechanism. And science has a lot of mechanisms [laughs] and a lot of publications and papers for which there's very little, if not no description of tools and practices. My goal in not just today but in many ways throughout the course of the podcast is to bridge the gaps between these various disciplines in ways that are grounded mainly to the fields of neuroscience and some related fields. So, yes, it's true that I look at things mainly through the lens of science, but that's not to say that it exhaustively explains everything about anything, nor is it to say that it's the only lens through which one could look at something like neuroplasticity. So I just want to acknowledge that I have great respect for all these different practices and communities. And I think that, indeed, there are many cases in which different communities and practices have been aimed at targeting the same goals or outcomes. Science and neuroscience, through an understanding of mechanism, can allow all of us to gain kind of common understanding about what those practices are and how to access things like neuroplasticity, sleep, et cetera. And I do believe. as I've said previously on this podcast, that understanding mechanism affords us a certain flexibility. And I don't mean physical flexibility. I mean a flexibility when we can't engage in a particular behavior, maybe we were injured or maybe we're not in the right situation to do a particular practice, but by thinking about mechanism, we can adapt our circumstances. I talked about this with sleep. If you're rigidly attached to one protocol of always looking at sunlight at one particular time in the morning and in the evening, that is not as valuable as understanding the mechanisms of why you might look at sunlight at one particular time versus another because that affords you a flexibility, allows you to adapt. And life is very dynamic and we don't have control over all the external conditions all the time. And so understanding mechanism through the lens of neuroscience, I do believe, can be very powerful because, of course, there are multiple ways to access dopamine, there are multiple ways to adjust limbic friction. It's not just through respiration. Of course, there are many ways to do that. And so my overall goal here in this episode and with this podcast is to give you some understanding of the mechanisms and the insights into the underlying biology that allow you to tailor what these kind of foundational mechanisms are to suit your particular learning needs. So I really thank you for your time and attention today. I've covered a lot of material. I very much encourage questions in the comments section if you're looking at this on YouTube. And if you're not and you're listening to it, on Apple or Spotify. Please feel free to visit us over on the YouTube channel and put your questions in the comments section. I do read them. This entire month is all about neuroplasticity. There's a lot to cover, but I'm very excited to delve deeper into this topic as it relates to your particular interests. Many of you have graciously asked how you can help support the podcast. The best way you can do that is to subscribe to the YouTube channel, if you haven't done that already, as well as to place questions in the comments section below, or comments if you'd like to give us feedback. Also to subscribe on Apple and/or Spotify. And Apple allows you to leave a five-star review, if you believe we deserve a five-star review, as well as leave comments about the podcast. In addition, if you can suggest the podcast to your friends, to your family members, or anyone that you think might be able to use and appreciate the information, that's a terrific way to support us. And, of course, check out our sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning. That's a terrific way to support us as well. Several times throughout today's episode, as well as on previous episodes of the podcast, I've talked about various supplements that can be useful for enhancing sleep, enhancing neuroplasticity, et cetera. And, again, I want to emphasize that I always think that behavioral practices are the place to start. I don't think supplements should ever be the first line of entry for people looking to enhance these aspects of their nervous system and life. But for those of you that are interested in supplements and the supplements that I take, I'm pleased to announce that we partnered with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E. And Thorne makes supplements that are, in my opinion, of the very highest stringency in terms of what's listed on the bottle is actually what you'll find in the bottle, this is a serious issue for the supplement industry, as well as just the overall quality of the materials they put into their supplements. If you'd like to take a look at the supplements that I take as well as explore any of them for yourself, you can go to thorne.com/u/huberman. And if you look there, you'll see a number of the different supplements that I take. And if you decide to purchase any of them, you'll get 20% off your order. So that's Thorne, thorne.com/u/huberman to see the supplements that I take and to explore if any of them are right for you. In the next episode of this podcast, we're going to continue to explore neuroplasticity. This, as you may recall, is the way that we go about things here the Huberman Lab Podcast, which is to really drill deeply into a topic for three or four, or even five episodes so that by the end of those episodes, all of you have a very firm understanding of how to apply the principles of neurobiology to the specific practices and endeavors that are most important to you. So I very much thank you for your time and attention. I know it's a lot of information and it takes a bit of focus and attention, and certainly will trigger plasticity to learn all this information. I want to encourage you and just remind you that you don't have to grasp it all at once, that it is here archived and that if you want to return to the information, it will still be here. And that I, most of all, really appreciate your interest in science. Thank you so much.

========================================

--- Video 343 ---
Video ID: LG53Vxum0as
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LG53Vxum0as
Title: How to Focus to Change Your Brain
Published: 2021-02-08 12:30:01 UTC
Description:
This episode introduces neuroplasticity—which is how our brain and nervous system learn and acquire new capabilities.  I describe the differences between childhood and adult neuroplasticity, the chemicals involved and how anyone can increase their rate and depth of learning by leveraging the science of focus. I describe specific tools for increasing focus and learning. The next two episodes will cover the ideal protocols for specific types of learning and how to make learning new information more reflexive.

#HubermanLab #Focus #Neuroscience

For an updated list of our current sponsors, please visit our website as previous sponsors mentioned in this podcast episode may no longer be affiliated with us: https://hubermanlab.com/sponsors

Reference: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.04.010

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Timestamps below.
00:00 Introduction 
03:50 Plasticity: What Is it, & What Is It For? 
06:30 Babies and Potato Bugs 
08:00 Customizing Your Brain 
08:50 Hard-Wired Versus Plastic Brains 
10:25 Everything Changes At 25 
12:29 Costello and Your Hearing 
13:10 The New Neuron Myth 
14:10 Anosmia: Losing Smell 
15:13 Neuronal Birthdays Near Our Death Day 
16:45 Circumstances for Brain Change 
17:21 Brain Space 
18:30 No Nose, Eyes, Or Ears 
19:30 Enhanced Hearing and Touch In The Blind 
20:20 Brain Maps of The Body Plan 
21:00 The Kennard Principle (Margaret Kennard) 
21:36 Maps of Meaning 
23:00 Awareness Cues Brain Change 
25:20 The Chemistry of Change 
26:15 A Giant Lie In The Universe 
27:10 Fathers of Neuroplasticity/Critical Periods 
29:30 Competition Is The Route to Plasticity  
32:30 Correcting The Errors of History 
33:29 Adult Brain Change: Bumps and Beeps 
36:25 What It Takes to Learn 
38:15 Adrenalin and Alertness 
40:18 The Acetylcholine Spotlight 
42:26 The Chemical Trio For Massive Brain Change 
44:10 Ways To Change Your Brain 
46:16 Love, Hate, & Shame: all the same chemical 
47:30 The Dopamine Trap 
49:40 Nicotine for Focus  
52:30 Sprinting   
53:30 How to Focus 
55:22 Adderall: Use & Abuse 
56:40 Seeing Your Way To Mental Focus 
1:02:59 Blinking 
1:05:30 An Ear Toward Learning 
1:06:14 The Best Listeners In The World 
1:07:20 Agitation is Key 
1:07:40 ADHD & ADD: Attention Deficit (Hyperactivity) Disorder 
1:12:00 Ultra(dian) Focus 
1:13:30 When Real Change Occurs 
1:16:20 How Much Learning Is Enough? 
1:16:50 Learning In (Optic) Flow/Mind Drift 
1:18:16 Synthesis/Summary  
1:25:15 Learning With Repetition, Forming Habits 

As always, thank you for your interest in science!

The Huberman Lab Podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: English (United States)
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat music] My name is Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford school of medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme. I want to thank the first sponsor of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes blood factors and DNA related factors that helps you develop a personalized health plan. Many important factors related to our health and wellbeing can only be measured by a blood sample and by a DNA sample. I've been getting my blood work done for many years now. And I use InsideTracker because InsideTracker makes it very easy to not only get the blood work done, someone can come to your house or you can go to a clinic for instance but also to interpret the data that you get. Oftentimes when we get blood work done there are all these numbers and all these levels of different hormones and metabolic factors and so forth. But one doesn't know what to do with that information InsideTracker has a terrific dashboard platform where you go online and it makes analyzing all that easy. And it also provides some very simple and straightforward directives in terms of exercise, nutrition and other lifestyle factors that can help guide your health and improve your health. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman and use the code "Huberman" at checkout to get 25% off your order. Today's episode is also brought to us by Headspace. Headspace is a meditation app that makes meditating easy. I've been meditating on and off for about three decades now. And typically it's been more off than on. I think like a lot of people I find it hard to stick with a meditation practice. A few years ago, I started using the Headspace app. And when I did that, I found that I was meditating really consistently. First of all, the meditations in Headspace are backed by quality scientific peer reviewed studies. Second of all the meditations allow the meditation to be kind of easy and fun to access. I started first using them when I would travel because on JetBlue flights, which was the airline I was using the meditations are offered as an alternative to watching a TV or a movie. And I found that I would arrive feeling much more refreshed than had I just sort of zoned out on the TV the whole time, or even if I had slept. And I'll continue to use Headspace regularly pretty much every day for a short meditation. And I personally derive tremendous benefits from it. If you'd like to try Headspace you can go to headspace.com/specialoffer and they'll give you one month of all the meditations that they have available completely free. That's the best offer available right now from Headspace. So you can go to headspace.com/specialoffer and you'll get one month completely free all the meditations they have. The third sponsor of today's podcast is Madefor. Madefor as a behavioral science company that is a subscription model in which you engage in specific activities each month for 10 months in order to bring about positive behavioral change and growth mindset. The company was founded by former Navy seal Patrick Dossett as well as Toms founder Blake Mycoskie. I'm the lead advisor of the scientific advisory board at Madefor and some of the other members of the advisory board include the head of the chronobiology unit at the national institute of health as well as psychiatrists from Harvard, UC Irvine and many other individuals who are serious about science and helped develop the Madefor program. If you want to try Madefor, you can go to getmadefor.com and if you enter "Huberman" at checkout you'll get 15% off the program. Today we're talking about neuroplasticity which is this incredible feature of our nervous systems that allows it to change in response to experience. neuroplasticity is arguably one of the most important aspects of our biology. It holds the promise for each and all of us to think differently, to learn new things, to forget painful experiences and to essentially adapt to anything that life brings us by becoming better. Neuroplasticity has a long and important history and we're not going to review all of it in detail. But today what we are going to do is discuss what is neuroplasticity? As well as the different forms of neuroplasticity. We're going to talk about how to access neuroplasticity depending on how old you are and depending on the specific types of changes that you're trying to create. This is a topic for which there are lots of tools, as well as lots of biological principles that we can discuss. So let's get started. Most people are familiar with the word neuroplasticity. It's sometimes also called neural plasticity. Those are the same thing. So, if I say neuroplasticity or neural plasticity, I'm referring to the same process, which is the brain and nervous system's ability to change itself. There are a lot of reasons why the nervous system would do this. It could do it in response to some traumatic event. It could, for instance, create a sense of fear around a particular place or a fear of automobiles or planes. It could also occur when something positive happens, like the birth of our first child or when our puppy does something amusing or we see an incredible feat of performance in athleticism. The word neuroplasticity means so many things to so many different people that I thought it would be important to just first put a little bit of organizational logic around what it is and how it happens, because nowadays if you were to go online and Google the word neuroplasticity, you would find hundreds of thousands of references, scientific references as well as a lot of falsehoods about what neuroplasticity is and how to access it. As I mentioned before, we're going to talk about the science of it and we're going to talk about the tools that allow you to engage this incredible feature of your nervous system. And that's the first point, which is that all of us were born with a nervous system that isn't just capable of change, but was designed to change. When we enter the world, our nervous system is primed for learning. The brain and nervous system of a baby is wired very crudely. The connections are not precise. And we can see evidence of that in the fact that babies are kind of flopping, they're like a little potato bug with limbs. They can't really do much in terms of coordinated movement. They certainly can't speak and they can't really do anything with precision. And that's because we come into this world overconnected. We have essentially wires, those wires have names like axons and dendrites. Those are the different parts of the neurons discussed in episode one, but those little parts and those wires and connections are everywhere. Imagine a bunch of roads that are all connected to one another in kind of a mess, but there are no highways. They're all just small roads. That's essentially what the young nervous system is like. And then as we mature, as we go from day one of life to 10 years old, 20 years old, 30 years old, what happens is particular connections get reinforced and stronger and other connections are lost. So that's the first important principle that I want everyone to understand, which is that developmental plasticity, the neuroplasticity that occurs from the time we're born until about age 25 is mainly a process of removing connections that don't serve our goals well. Now, of course, certain events happen during that birth to 25 period in which positive events and negative events are really stamped down into our nervous system in a very dramatic fashion, by what we call one-trial learning. We experience something once and then our nervous system is forever changed by that experience. Unless of course, we go through some work to undo that experience. So, I want you to imagine in your mind that when you were brought into this world, you were essentially a widely connected web of connections that was really poor at doing any one thing. And that through your experience, what you were exposed to by your parents or rather caretakers, through your social interactions, through your thoughts, through the languages that you learn, through the places you traveled or didn't travel, your nervous system became customized to your unique experience. Now, that's true for certain parts of your brain that are involved in what we call representations of the outside world. A lot of your brain is designed to represent the visual world or represent the auditory world or represent the gallery of smells that are possible in the world. However, there are aspects of your nervous system that were designed not to be plastic. They were wired so that plasticity or changes in those circuits is very unlikely. Those circuits include things like, the ones that control your heartbeat, the ones that control your breathing, the ones that control your digestion, And thank goodness that those circuits were set up that way because you want those circuits to be extremely reliable. You never want to have to think about whether or not your heart will beat or whether or not you will continue breathing or whether or not you'll be able to digest your food. So many nervous system features like digestion and breathing and heart rate are hard to change. Other aspects of our nervous system are actually quite easy to change. And one of the great gifts of childhood, adolescence and young adulthood, is that we can learn through almost passive experience. We don't have to focus that hard in order to learn new things. In fact, children go from being able to speak no language whatsoever to being able to speak many many words and comprise sentences including words they've never heard before which is remarkable. It means that the portions of the brain involved in speech and language are actually primed to learn and create new combinations. What this tells us is that the young brain is a plasticity machine. But then right about age 25 plus or minus a year or two, everything changes. After age 25 or so, in order to get changes in our nervous system, we have to engage in a completely different set of processes in order to get those changes to occur and for them more importantly to stick around. And this is something that I think is vastly overlooked in the popular culture discussion about neuroplasticity. People always talk about fire together, wire together. Fire together wire together is true. It is the statement of my colleague at Stanford, Carla Shatz and it's an absolute truth about the way that the nervous system wires up early in development. But, fire together wire together doesn't apply in the same way after age 25. And so we have these little memes and these little quotes that, you know circulate on the internet like fire together, wire together or there's a famous quote from the greatest neurobiologist of all time, Ramón y Cajal. I think it goes something like, you know should somebody wish to change their nervous system they could be the sculptor of their nervous system in any way they want, something like that. And that sounds great. I mean, who wouldn't want to change their nervous system any way they want, but what's lost in those statements is how to actually accomplish that. And we're going to cover that today but please understand that early in development your nervous system is connected very broadly in ways that make it very hard to do anything well. From birth until about age 25 those connections get refined mainly through the removal of connections that don't serve us and the incredible strengthening of connections that relate to either powerful experiences or that allow us to do things like walk and talk and do math, et cetera. And then after age 25, if we want to change those connections, those super highways of connectivity, we have to engage in some very specific processes. And those processes, as we'll soon learn are gated. Meaning you can't just decide to change your brain. You actually have to go through a series of steps to change your internal state in ways that will allow you to change your brain. I just want to acknowledge that Costello is snoring particularly loud today. Some of you seem very keen at picking up on his snoring, others of you can't hear his snoring. It's very low rumbling sound and whether or not you can or you can't probably relates to the sensitivity of your hearing. We're actually going to talk about perfect pitch today and range of auditory detection. And so if you can hear Costello's snoring enjoy, if you can't, enjoy. I want to talk about how the nervous system changes. What are these changes? Many of us have been captivated by the stories in the popular press about the addition of new neurons. This idea, oh, if you go running or you exercise, your brain actually makes new neurons. Well, I'm going to give you the bad news first which is that, after puberty, so after about age 14 or 15, the human brain and nervous system adds very few if any new neurons. The idea that new neurons could be added to the brain is one that has a rich history in experimental science. It's clear that in rodents and in some non-human primates new neurons, a process called neurogenesis, can occur in areas of the brain, such as the olfactory bulb, which is of course involved in smell as well as a region of our hippocampus, a center of the brain involved in memory called the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus. And there is strong evidence that new neurons can be added to those structures throughout the lifespan. In humans, the evidence is a little bit more controversial. It's clear that we can add new neurons to our olfactory bulb. In fact, if any of you have ever had the unfortunate experience of being hit on the head too hard, the wires called axons from those olfactory neurons that live in your nose can get sheared off because they have to pass through a bony plate called the cribriform plate. And the cribriform plate can shear those axons and people can become what's called anosmic, they won't be able to smell. But over time, those neurons unlike most all central nervous system neurons can grow those connections back and even reestablish new neurons being added to the olfactory bulb. They come from elsewhere deep in the brain and they migrate through a pathway called the rostral migratory stream. You can Google these words and look up some of the descriptions of this if you'd like to learn more. So indeed there is some evidence that the neurons responsible for smell can be replaced throughout the lifespan. Certainly, in very young individuals from birth till about age 15 or so. Whether or not they're new neurons added to the hippocampus, the memory center of the human brain isn't clear. Many years ago, Rusty Gage's lab at the Salk Institute did a really important study looking at terminally ill cancer patients and injecting them with a label, a dye that is incorporated only into new neurons. And after these patients died, their brains were harvested. The brains were looked at and there were new neurons there, there was evidence for new neurons. Those results I think stand over time but what was not really discussed in the popular press discussion around those papers was that it was very few cells that were being added. And a number of papers have come along over the years mainly from labs at UCSF, although from others as well, showing that if there are new neurons added to the adult brain, it's an infinitesimally small number of new neurons. So that's the depressing part, we don't get new neurons. After we're born, we pretty much have the neurons that we're going to use our entire life. And yes, as we get older and we start to lose certain functions in our brain, we lose neurons. But all is not lost, so to speak, because there are other ways in which neurocircuits can create new connections and add new functions including new memory, new abilities and new cognitive functions. And those are mainly through the process of making certain connections, which of course are those things we call synapses, between neurons making those connections stronger. So they're more reliable, they're more likely to engage as well as removing connections. And the removal of connections is vital to say moving through a grieving process or removing the emotional load of a traumatic experience. So even though we can't add new neurons throughout our lifespan, at least not in very great numbers, it's clear that we can change our nervous system, that the nervous system is available for change, that if we create the right set of circumstances in our brain, chemical circumstances, and if we create the right environmental circumstances around us, our nervous system will shift into a mode in which change isn't just possible but it's probable. As I mentioned before, the hallmark of the child nervous system is change, it wants to change. The whole thing, everything from the chemicals that are sloshing around in there to the fact that there's a lot of space between the neurons. A lot of people don't know this, but early in development there's a lot of space between the neurons. And so the neurons can literally move around and sample different connections very easily removing some and keeping others. As we get older, the so-called extracellular space is actually filled up by things called extracellular matrix and glial cells. Glial means glue. Those cells are involved in a bunch of different processes but they start to fill in all the space kind of like pouring concrete between rocks. And when that happens, it becomes much harder to change the connections that are there. One of the ways in which we can all get plasticity at any stage throughout the lifespan is through deficits and impairments in what we call our sensory apparati, our eyes, our ears, our nose, our mouth, and there are some very dramatic and somewhat tragic examples of people, for instance who have genetic mutations where they're born without a nose and without any olfactory structures in the brain so they cannot smell. In that case areas of the brain that normally would represent smell become overtaken by areas of the brain involved in other things like touch and hearing and sight. In individuals that are blind from birth, the so-called occipital cortex, the visual cortex in the back, becomes overtaken by hearing. The neurons there will start to respond to sounds as well as braille touch. And actually there's a one particularly tragic incident where a woman who was blind since birth and because of neuroimaging studies, we knew her visual cortex was no longer visual, it was responsible for braille reading and for hearing, she had a stroke that actually took out most of the function of her visual cortex. So then she was blind, she couldn't braille read or hear. She did recover some aspect of function. Now, most people they don't end up in that highly unfortunate situation. And what we know is that for instance, blind people who use their visual cortex for braille reading and for hearing, have much better auditory acuity and touch acuity. Meaning they can sense things with their fingers and they can sense things with their hearing that typical sighted folks wouldn't be able to. In fact, you will find a much greater incidence of perfect pitch in people that are blind. And that tells us that the brain and in particular this area we call the neocortex, which is the outer part, is really designed to be a map of our own individual experience. So these, what I call experiments of impairment or loss where somebody is blind from birth or deaf from birth or maybe has a limb development impairment where they have a stump instead of an entire limb with a functioning hand, their brain will represent the body plan that they have, not some other body plan. But the beauty of the situation is that the real estate up in the skull, that neocortex, the essence of it is to be a customized map of experience. Now, it is true however, that if let's say I were to be blind when I'm 50, I'm 45 right now, I've always been sighted. If I was blind at 50, I'll probably have less opportunity to use my formerly visual cortex for things like braille reading and hearing because my brain has changed, it's just not the same brain I had when I was a baby. So there's actually a principle of biology, not many people know this, it's actually a principle neurology which is called the Kennard principle, which says, if you're going to have a brain injury, you want to have it early in life. And of course better to not have a brain injury at all but if you're going to have it you want to have it early in life. And this is based on a tremendous number of experiments examining the amount of recovery and the rate of recovery in humans that had lesions to their brain either early in life or later in life. So the Kennard Principle says better to have injuries early in life. Now, that's reassuring for the young folks, it's not so reassuring for the older folks. But there are aspects of neuroplasticity that have nothing to do with impairments. I mean earlier I said we're all walking around with this map, this representation of the world around us so we can see edges, we can see colors, except for folks that are color blind of course, and we also have a map of emotional experience. We have a map of whether or not certain people are trustworthy, certain people aren't trustworthy. A few years ago I was at a course and a woman came up to me and she said, you know, I wasn't teaching the course, I was in the course and she said, "I just have to tell you that every time you speak, it really stresses me out." And I said, "Well I've heard that before but do you want to be more specific?" And she said, "Yeah, your tone of voice reminds me of somebody that I had a really terrible experience with." I said, "Well, okay, well, I can't change my voice but I really appreciate that you acknowledge that and it also will help explain why you seem to cringe every time I speak", which I hadn't noticed until then but after that I did notice. She had a very immediate and kind of visceral response to my speech, perhaps some of you are having that right now. But in any event, over the period of this two-week course, she would come back every once in a while and say, "You know what I think, just by telling you that your voice was really difficult for me to listen to, it's actually becoming more tolerable to me." And by the end we actually became pretty good friends and we're still in touch. And so what this says is that the recognition of something whether or not that's an emotional thing or a desire to learn something else is actually the first step in neuroplasticity. And that's because our nervous system has two broad sets of functions. Some of those functions are reflexive. Things like our breathing, our heart rate, our obvious ones, but other aspects are reflexive like our ability to walk. If I get up out of this chair and walk out of the door, I don't think about each step that I'm taking and that's because I learned how to walk during development. But when we decide that we're going to shift some sort of behavior or some reaction or some new piece of information that we want to learn, it's something that we want to bring into our consciousness, that awareness is a remarkable thing because it cues the brain and the rest of the nervous system that when we engage in those reflexive actions going forward, that those reflexive actions are no longer fated to be reflexive. Now if this sounds a little bit abstract, we're going to talk about protocols for how to do this. But the first step in neuroplasticity is recognizing that you want to change something and you should immediately say, well, kids don't go into school and say, oh, I want to learn language or I want to learn social interactions, and that's the beauty of childhood. The whole brain has this switch flipped that is making change possible but after that we have to be deliberate. We have to know what it is exactly that we want to change. Or if we don't know exactly what it is that we want to change, we at least have to know that we want to change something about some specific experience. In this case, I believe that she came and told me that my voice was really awful for her to listen to not to make me feel bad or for any other reason except that she wanted it to not be the case. And she knew I wasn't going to stop talking. So she decided to call it to her consciousness and mine as well. So that's important. If you want to learn something or you want to change your nervous system in any way, whether or not it's because of some impairment or because of something that you want to acquire, a cognitive skill, a motor skill, an emotional skill, the first thing is recognizing what that thing is. And that often can be the hardest thing to identify but the brain has the self recognition mechanisms and those self recognition mechanisms are not vague, spiritual or mystical or even psychological concepts. They are neurochemicals. We're going to talk next about the neurochemicals that stamp down particular behaviors and thoughts and emotional patterns and tell the rest of the nervous system, this is something to pay attention to because this is in the direction of the change that I want to make. So I'll repeat that, there are specific chemicals that when we are consciously aware of a change we want to make or even just that we want to make some change, chemicals are released in the brain that allow us the opportunity to make those changes. Now, there are specific protocols that science tells us We have to follow if we want those changes to occur. But that self-recognition is not a kind of murky concept. What it is is it's our fore brain, in particular our prefrontal cortex, signaling the rest of our nervous system that something that we're about to do, hear, feel or experience is worth paying attention to. So we'll pause there and then I'm going to move forward. One of the biggest lies in the universe that seems quite prominent right now is that every experience you have changes your brain. People love to say this. They love to say, your brain is going to be different after this lecture or that your brain is going to be different after today's class than it was two days ago. And that's absolutely not true. The nervous system doesn't just change because you experienced something unless you're a very young child. The nervous system changes when certain neurochemicals are released and allow whatever neurons are active in the period in which those chemicals are swimming around, to strengthen or weaken the connections of those neurons. Now, this is best illustrated through a little bit of scientific history. The whole basis of neuroplasticity is essentially ascribed to two individuals, although there were a lot more people that were involved in this work. Those two individuals go by the name David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel. David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel started off at Johns Hopkins, moved to Harvard medical school. And in the seventies and eighties, they did a series of experiments, recording electrical activity in the brain. They were in the visual cortex, meaning they put the electrodes in the visual cortex, and they were exploring how vision works and how the visual brain organizes all the features of the visual world to give us these incredible things We call visual perceptions. But Hubel was a physician. And he was very interested in what happens when for instance, a child comes into the world and they have a cataract, the lens of their eye, isn't clear but it's opaque. Or when a kid has a lazy eye or the eyes have what's called strabismus, which is when the eyes either deviate outward or inward. These are very common things of childhood, especially in particular areas of the world. And what David and Torsten did is they figured out that there was a critical period in which if clear vision did not occur, the visual brain would completely rewire itself, basically to represent whatever bit of visual information was coming in. So they did these experiments to kind of simulate a droopy eye or a deviating eye where they would close one eyelid and then what they found is that the visual brain would respond entirely to the open eye. There was sort of a takeover of the visual brain representing the open eye. Many experiments in many different sensory systems followed up on this. There are beautiful experiments for instance, from Gregg Recanzone's lab up at UC Davis and Mike Merzenich's lab at UCSF showing that for instance if two fingers were taped together early in development, so they weren't moving independently, the representation of those two fingers would become fused in the brain so that the person couldn't actually distinguish the movements and the sensations of the two fingers separately, pretty remarkable. All of this is to say that David and Torsten's work, for which they won a noble prize, they shared it with Rogers Barry, their work showed that the brain is in fact a customized map of the outside world, we said that already. But that what it's doing is it's measuring the amount of activity for a given part of our body, one eye or the other, or our fingers, this finger or that finger and all of those inputs are competing for space in the brain. Now this is fundamentally important because what it means is that if we are to change our nervous system in adulthood, we need to think about not just what we're trying to get, but what we're trying to give up. We can't actually add new connections without removing something else. And that might seem like kind of a stinger but it actually turns out to be a great advantage. One of the key experiments that David and Torsten did was an experiment where they closed both eyes, where they essentially removed all visual input early in development. Now this is slightly different than blindness because it was transient, it was only for a short period of time. But what they found is when they did that there was no change. However, if they would close just one eye there was a huge change. So when people tell you, oh at the end of today's lecture, or at the end of something your brain is going to be completely different, that's simply not true. If you're older than 25 your brain will not change unless there's a selective shift in your attention or a selective shift in your experience that tells the brain it's time to change. And those changes occur through the ways I talked about before strengthening and weakening of particular connections, they have names like long-term potentiation, long-term depression, which has nothing to do with emotional depression by the way, spike-timing-dependent plasticity. I threw out those names not to confuse you, but for those of you that would like more in-depth exploration of those, please you can go google those and look them up, there are great Wikipedia pages for them and you can go down the paper trail. I might even touch on them on some subsequent episodes. But the important thing to understand is that if we want something to change, we really need to bring an immense amount of attention to whatever it is that we want to change. This is very much linked to the statement I made earlier about, it all starts with an awareness. Now, why is that attention important? Well, David and Torsten won their Nobel prize and they certainly deserved it. They probably deserved two because they also figured out how vision works. And I might be biased 'cause they're my scientific great-grandparents but I think everybody in the field of Neuroscience agrees that Hubel and Wiesel, as they're called H&W for those in the game, absolutely deserved a Nobel prize for their work because they really unveiled the mechanisms of brain change of plasticity. David passed away a few years ago, Torsten is still alive, he's in his late 90s, he's still at the Rockefeller university. He's sharp as a tack. He still jogs several miles a day. He's really into art and a number of other things. He's also a super nice guy. Hubel was a really nice guy as well, also he was a great Frisbee player I discovered 'cause he beat me in a game of ultimate when he was like 80, which still, it has me a little bit irked. But anyway, Hubel and Wiesel did an amazing thing for science that will forever change the way that we think about the brain. However, they were quite wrong about this critical period thing. The critical period was this idea that if you were to deprive the nervous system of an input, say closing one eye early in development and the rest of the visual cortex is taken over by the representation of the open eye, that you could never change that unless you intervened early. And this actually formed the basis for why a kid that has a lazy eye or a cataract why, even though there's some issues with anesthesia in young children, why now we know that you want to get in there early and fix the cataract or fix the strabismus it's what ophthalmologists do. However, their idea that you had to do it early or else there was no opportunity to rescue the nervous system deficit later on turned out wasn't entirely true. In the early 90s, a graduate student by the name of Gregg Recanzone was in the laboratory of a guy named Mike Merzenich at UCSF. And they set out to test this idea that if one wants to change their brain, they need to do it early in life because the adult brain simply isn't plastic it's not available for these changes. And they did a series of absolutely beautiful experiments, by now I think we can say proving that the adult brain can change provided certain conditions are met. Now, the experiments they did are tough. They were tough on the experimenter and they were tough on the subject. I'll just describe one. Let's say you were a subject in one of their experiments. You would come into the lab and you'd sit down at a table and they would record from or image your brain and look at the representation of your fingers the digits as we call them. And there would be a spinning drum, literally a like a stone drum in front of your metal drum that had little bumps. Some of the bumps were spaced close together, some of them were spaced far apart. And they would do these experiments where they would expect their subjects to press a lever whenever for instance, the bumps got closer together or further apart and these were very subtle differences. So in order to do this you really have to pay attention to the distance between the bumps and these were not braille readers or anyone skilled in doing these kinds of experiments. What they found was that as people paid more and more attention to the distance between these bumps and they would signal when there was a change by pressing a lever, as they did that there was very rapid changes plasticity in the representation of the fingers. And it could go in either direction. You could get people very good at detecting the distance between bumps, that the distance was getting smaller or that the distance was getting greater. So people could get very good at these tasks that you're kind of hard to imagine how they would translate to the real world for a non braille reader. But what it told us is that these maps of touch were very much available for plasticity. And these were fully adult subjects. They're not taking any specific drugs. They don't have any impairments that we're aware of. And what it showed, what it proved is that the adult brain is very plastic. And they did some beautiful control experiments that are important for everyone to understand which is that sometimes they would bring people in and they would have them touch these bumps on this spinning drum but they would have the person pay attention to an auditory cue. Every time a tone would go off, or there was a shift in the pitch of that tone, they would have to signal that. So the subject thought they were doing something related to touch and hearing and all that showed was that it wasn't just the mere action of touching these bumps. They had to pay attention to the bumps themselves. If they were placing their attention on the auditory cue on the tone, well then there was plasticity in the auditory portion of the brain but not on the touch portion of the brain. And this really spits in the face of this thing that you hear so often which is every experience that you have is going to change the way your brain works. Absolutely not. The experiences that you pay super careful attention to are what open up plasticity and it opens up plasticity to that specific experience. So the question then is why? And Merzenich and his graduate students and postdocs went on to address this question of why. And it turns out the answer is a very straightforward neurochemical answer. And inside of that answer is the opportunity for any of us to change our brain at any point throughout our lifespan, essentially for anything that we want to learn, that could be subtracting an emotion from an experience we've had, it could be building a greater range of emotion, it could be learning new information like learning a new language. It could be learning new motor skill, like dance or sport or it could be some combination of cognitive motor. So for instance, an air traffic controller has to do a lot with their mind in addition to a lot with their hands. So it's not just cognitive, it's not just motor but combined. So we're going to talk about what that chemical is but to just give you an important hint, that chemical is the same chemical of stress. This is not a discussion about stress per se. In a future podcast episode, we'll talk all about stress and tools to deal with stress, something my lab works on quite extensively. And it's a topic that I enjoy discussing. But this is a topic about brain change. And what I just told you is that in order to change the brain you have to pay careful attention. And the immediate question should be well, why? Well, the answer is that when we pay careful attention there are two neurochemicals, neuromodulators as they're called, that are released from multiple sites in our brain that highlight the neural circuits that stand a chance of changing. Now it's not necessarily the case that they're going to change, but it's the first gate that has to open in order for change to occur. And the first neurochemical is epinephrin, also adrenaline. We call it adrenaline when it's released from the adrenal glands above our kidneys, that's in the body, we call it epinephrin in the brain, but they are chemically identical substances. Epinephrin is released from a region in the brainstem called locus coeruleus. Fancy name, you don't need to know it unless you want to. Locus coeruleus sends out these little wires we call axons such that it hoses the entire brain essentially in this neurochemical, epinephrin. Now it's not always hosing the brain with epinephrin. It's only when we are in high states of alertness that this epinephrin is released. But the way this circuit is designed, it's very nonspecific. It's essentially waking up the entire brain and that's because the way that epinephrin works by binding particular receptors is to increase the likelihood that neurons will be active. So no alertness, no neuroplasticity. However, alertness alone is not sufficient. As we would say, it's necessary but not sufficient for neuroplasticity. We know this is true also from the work of Hubel and Wiesel where they looked at brain plasticity in response to certain experiences in subjects that were either awake or asleep. And I hate to break it to you but you cannot just simply listen to things in your sleep and learn those materials. Later I'll talk about how you can do certain things in your sleep that you're unaware of that can enhance learning of things that you were aware of while you were awake. But that is not the same as just listening to some music or listening to a tape while you sleep and expecting it to sink in, so to speak. Epinephrin is released when we pay attention and when we are alert. But the most important thing for getting plasticity is that there'll be epinephrin which equates to alertness, plus the release of this neuromodulator, acetylcholine. Now acetylcholine is released from two sites in the brain. One is also in the brainstem and it's named different things in different animals, but in humans the most rich site of acetylcholine neurons or neurons that make acetylcholine is the parabigeminal nucleus or the parabrachial region. There are a number of different names of these aggregates of neurons. You don't need to know the names, all you need to know is that you have an area in your brainstem and that area sends wires, these axons up into the area of the brain that filters sensory input. So we have this area of the brain called the thalamus and it is getting bombarded with all sorts of sensory input all the time. Costello snoring off to my right, the lights that are in the room, the presence of my computer to my left, all of that is coming in. But when I pay attention to something like if I really hone in on Costello snoring, I create a cone of attention and what that cone of attention reflects is that acetylcholine is now amplifying the signal of sounds that Costello is making with his snoring and essentially making that signal greater than all the signal around it, what we call signal-to-noise goes up. So those of you with an engineering background will be familiar with signal-to-noise. Those of you who do not have an engineering background, don't worry about it. All it means is that one particular shout in the crowd comes through, Costello's snoring becomes more salient, more apparent relative to everything else going on. Acetylcholine acts as a spotlight but epinephrin for alertness. acetylcholine spotlighting these inputs. Those two things alone are not enough to get plasticity. There needs to be this third component. And the third component is acetylcholine released from an area of the forebrain called nucleus basalis. If you really want to get technical, it's called nucleus basalis of Meynert. For any of you that are buddying physicians or going to medical school, you should know that. If you have acetylcholine released from the brainstem, acetylcholine released from nucleus basalis and epinephrin, you can change your brain. And I can say that with confidence because Merzenich and Recanzone as well as other members of the Merzenich lab, Michael Kilgard and others did these incredible experiments where they stimulated the release of acetylcholine from nucleus basalis either with an electrode or with some other methods that we'll talk about. And what they found was when you stimulate these three brain regions, locus coeruleus, the brainstem source of acetylcholine and then the basal forebrain source of acetylcholine. When you have those three things whatever you happen to be listening to, doing or paying attention to immediately in one trial takes over the representation of a particular area of the brain. You essentially get rapid massive learning in one shop. And this has been shown again and again and again in a variety of papers also by a guy named Norman Weinberger from UC Irvine. And it is now considered a fundamental principle of how the nervous system works. So while Hubel and Wiesel talked about critical periods in developmental plasticity, it's very clear from the work of Merzenich and Weinberg and others, that if you get these three things, if you can access these three things of epinephrin, acetylcholine from these two sources, not only will the nervous system change, it has to change. It absolutely will change. And that is the most important thing for people to understand if they want to change their brain. You cannot just passively experience things and repetition can be important, but the way to use repetition to change your brain is fundamentally different. So now let's talk about how we would translate all the scientific information and history into some protocols that you can actually apply, because I think that's what many of you're interested in. And I'm willing to bet that most of you are not interested in lowering electrodes into your nucleus basalis and frankly, neither am I. In episode one of the Huberman Lab Podcast, I described the various ways that people can monitor and change their nervous system. Those ways include brain machine interface, pharmacology, behavioral practices, and those behavioral practices of course can include some dos, do this and some don'ts, don't do that, et cetera In thinking about neuroplasticity, I want to have a very frank conversation about what one can do but also acknowledge this untapped capacity that I'm just not hearing about out there, which is one can also combine behavioral practices with pharmacology. One can combine behavioral practices with brain machine interface, and you don't have to do that. In fact, I'm not recommending you do anything in particular. As always, I'll say it again, I'm not a physician, so I don't prescribe anything. I'm a professor, so I profess a lot of things. What you do with your health and your medical care is up to you. You're responsible for your health and wellbeing. So I'm not going to tell you what to do or what to take. I'm going to describe what the literature tells us and suggests about ways to access plasticity. We know we need epinephrin, that means alertness. Most people accomplish this through a cup of coffee and a good night's sleep. So I will say you should master your sleep schedule and you should figure out how much sleep you need in order to achieve alertness when you sit down to learn. All the tools and more science than probably you ever wanted to hear about sleep and how to get better at sleeping and timing your sleep et cetera and naps and all of that is in episodes two, three, four, and five of the Huberman Lab Podcast. So I encourage you to refer to those if your sleep is not where you would like it to be. Your ability to engage in deliberate focused alertness is in direct proportion to how well you are sleeping on a regular basis. I think that's kind of an obvious one. So get your sleep handled. But once that's in place, the question then is how do I access this alertness? Well, there are a number of ways. Some people use some pretty elaborate psychological gymnastics. They will tell people that they're going to do something and create some accountability. That could be really good. Or they'll post a picture of themselves online and they'll commit to learning a certain amount losing, excuse me, a certain amount of weight or something like this. So they can use either shame-based practices to potentially embarrass themselves if they don't follow through. They'll write cheques to organizations that they hate and insist that they'll cash them if they don't actually follow through or they'll do it out of love, you know, they'll decide that they're going to run a marathon or learn a language or something because of somebody they love or they want to devote it to somebody. The truth is that from the standpoint of epinephrin and getting alert and activated, it doesn't really matter. Epinephrin is a chemical and your brain does not distinguish between doing things out of love or hate, anger or fear. It really doesn't, all of those promote autonomic arousal and the release of epinephrin. So I think for most people if you're feeling not motivated to make these changes the key thing is to identify not just one but probably at kit of reasons, several reasons as to why you would want to make this particular change and being drawn toward a particular goal that you're excited about can be one, also being motivated to not be completely afraid, ashamed, or humiliated for not following through on a goal is another. I just want to briefly mention one little aside there because I've got a friend who's a physician, he's a cardiologist who has a really interesting theory. This is just theory, but I think it will resonate with a lot of people, which is that, you've all heard of this molecule dopamine that gives us the sense of reward when we accomplish something. Well, we also want to be able to access dopamine while we're working towards things, enjoy the process as they say, 'cause it has all sorts of positive effects gives us energy, et cetera. With my friend, what he says is, you know, there's many many instances where someone will come to him and say, "You know what, I'm going to write a book." And he says, "Oh, that's great. I'm sure the book's going to be terrific and you really should write a book." And then they never go do it. And his theory is, if you get so much dopamine from the reward of people saying, Oh yeah, you're absolutely going to be able to do that, you might not actually go after the reward of the accomplishment itself. So be aware these positive reinforcements also. I'm not saying people should flagellate themselves to the point of victory in whatever they're pursuing, but motivation is a tricky one. So I suggest that everyone asks themselves what is it that I want to accomplish? And what is it that's driving me to accomplish this and come up with two or three things. Fear-based perhaps, love-based perhaps or perhaps several of those in order to ensure alertness, energy and attention for the task. And that brings us to the attention part. Now it's one thing to have an electrode embedded into your brain and increase the amount of acetylcholine. It's another to exist in the real world outside the laboratory and have trouble focusing. Having trouble bringing your attention to a particular location in space for a particular event. And there's a lot of discussion nowadays about smartphones and devices creating a sort of attention deficit, almost at a clinical level for many people, including adults. I think that's largely true. And what it means, however, is that we all are responsible for learning how to create depth of focus. There are some important Neuroscience principles to get depth of focus. I want to briefly talk about the pharmacology first because I always get asked about this. People say, "What can I take to increase my levels of acetylcholine?" Well, there are things you can take. Nicotine is called nicotine because acetylcholine binds to the nicotinic receptor. There are two kinds of acetylcholine receptors, muscarinic and nicotinic, but the nicotinic ones are involved in attention and alertness. I have colleagues, these are not my, you know kind of like bro, science buddies, I have those friends too, this is a Nobel prize winning colleague who chews Nicorette while he works. He used to be a smoker. He quit smoking because of fear of lung cancer, seemed like a smart choice, but he missed the level of focus that he could bring to his work. This is somebody who has had very long career. And if you ever meet with him, unfortunately I can't name him. If you ever meet with him what you realize is he chews about five pieces of Nicorette an hour, which I am not suggesting people do. But when I asked him, "Why are you doing this?" He said, "Well, increases my alertness and focus." And also his theory and I want to really underscore that it's theory not scientifically supported yet, is that it offsets Parkinson's and Alzheimer's. It is true that nucleus basalis is the primary site of degeneration in the brain, in people that have dementia and Parkinson's and it's what leads to a lot of their inability to focus their attention, not just deficits and plasticity. So he might be onto something. Now I've tried chewing Nicorette, it makes me super jittery. I don't like it because I can't focus very well. It kind of takes me too far up the level of autonomic arousal. I've got friends that dip Nicorette all day, some of whom are scientists, writers and artists and musicians are familiar with the effects of nicotine from the era where a lot of people smoked and fortunately fewer people smoke now. So if you're interested in the pharmacology, there are supplements and things that can increase cholinergic transmission in the brain. I'm not suggesting you do this but if you're going to go down that route, you want to be very careful how much you rely on those all the time. Because the essence of plasticity is to create a window of attention and focus that's distinct from the rest of your day. That's what's going to create a mark in your brain and the potential for plasticity. Things that increase acetylcholine, besides nicotine or Nicorette, the nicotine could come from a variety of sources or things like alpha-GPC or choline. There are a number of these things. I would encourage you to go to examine.com, the website and just put in acetylcholine and it will give you a list of supplements as well as some of the dangers of these supplements that are associated with cholinergic transmission. But I would be remiss and I would be lying if I didn't say that there are a lot of people out there who are using cholinergic drugs in order to increase their level of focus. And since we're coming up on the Olympics, I don't want to get anyone in trouble but I'm well aware that the fact that the sprinters are really into cholinergic drugs because not only is acetylcholine important for the focus that allows them to hear the gun and be first out the blocks on the sprints. That's a lot of where the race is won, hearing that gun and being the quickest on reaction time. So they take cholinergic agents for that as well as acetylcholine is the molecule that controls nerve to muscle contraction. So your speed of reflexes is actually controlled by this nicotinic transmission as well. So lots to think about in terms of acetylcholine in sport and mental acuity, not just plasticity. Now for most of you, you probably don't want to chew Nicorette, definitely don't want to smoke cigarettes or take supplements for increasing acetylcholine. So what are some ways that you can increase acetylcholine? And there, it's going to sound like a bit of a circular argument but you to increase focus. How do you increase focus? You know, people are so familiar with sitting down, reading a couple pages of a book and realizing that none of it sunk in or talking to someone and seeing their mouth move, maybe even nodding your head subconsciously and none of it sinks in. This can be very damaging for school, work performance and relationships as many of you know. Costello incidentally never seems to pay attention to anything I say while looking directly at me, which contradicts what I'm about to say, which is that the best way to get better at focusing is to use the mechanisms of focus that you were born with. And the key principle here is that mental focus follows visual focus. We are all familiar with the fact that our visual system can be unfocused, blurry or jumping around or we can be very laser focused on one location in space. What's interesting and vitally important to understanding how to access neuroplasticity is that you can use your visual focus and you can increase your visual focus as a way of increasing your mental focus abilities more broadly. So I'm going to explain how to do that. Plasticity starts with alertness. And as I mentioned before, that alertness can come from a sense of love, a sense of joy, a sense of fear, doesn't matter. There are pharmacologic ways to access alertness too. The most common one is of course caffeine which if you watch the sleep episodes, you know reduces this molecule that makes us sleepy called adenosine. I drink plenty of caffeine. I'm a heavy user of caffeine. I don't think abuser of caffeine. I think in reasonable amounts provided we can still fall asleep at night, caffeine can be a relatively safe way to increase epinephrin. Now, many people are now also using Adderall. Adderall chemically looks a lot like amphetamine and basically it is amphetamine. It will increase epinephrin release from locus coeruleus, it will wake up the brain and that's why a lot of people rely on it. It does have a heavy basis for use in certain clinical syndromes prescribed such as attention deficit. However, it also has a high probability of abuse especially in those who are not prescribed it. Adderall will not increase focus, it increases alertness. It does not touch the acetylcholine system. And if those of you that are taking Adderall say, "Well, it really increases my focus overall", that's probably because your autonomic nervous system is just veering towards what we call parasympathetic. You're really just very sleepy and so it's bringing your levels of alertness up. As I mentioned, Adderall is very problematic for a number of people as it can be habit forming. Learning on Adderall does not always translate to high-performance off or on Adderall at later times. And the Adderall discussion is a broader one that perhaps we should have with a psychiatrist in the room at some point because it is a very widely abused drug at this point in time. The acetylcholine system and the focus that it brings is available as I mentioned through pharmacology, but also through these behavioral practices. And the behavioral practices that are anchored in visual focus are going to be the ones that are going to allow you to develop great depth and duration of focus. So let's think about visual focus for a second. When we focus on something visually, we have two options. We can either look at a very small region of space with a lot of detail and a lot of precision or we can dilate our gaze and we can see big pieces of visual space with very little detail. It's a trade-off. We can't look at everything at high resolution. This is why we have these, the pupil more or less relates to the fovea of the eye which is the area in which we have the most receptors, the highest density of receptors that perceive light. And so our acuity is much better in the center of our visual field than our periphery. It's a simple experiment you can do right now. If you're listening to this, you can still do it. You can hold your feet or your hands out in front of you. Provided that you're sighted you should be able to see how many fingers you have in front of you. For me, it's five. I still got all five fingers, amazingly enough. If I move my hand off to the side, I can't see them with precision, but as I moved them back into the center of my visual field I can see them with precision. And that's because the density, the number of pixels in the center of my visual field is much higher than it is in the periphery. When we focus our eyes, we do a couple of things. First of all, we tend to do that in the center of our visual field and our two eyes tend to align in what's called a vergence eye movement towards a common point. The other thing that happens is the lens of our eye moves so that our brain now no longer sees the entire visual world but is seeing a small cone of visual imagery. [door banging] If it... That was the dog bumping into the wall, forgive me. That small cone of visual imagery or soda straw view of the world has much higher acuity, higher resolution than if I were to look at everything. Now you see, of course, this makes perfect sense but that's about visual attention, not mental attention. Well, it turns out that focus in the brain is anchored to our visual system. I'll talk about blind people in a moment but assuming that somebody is sighted, the key is to learn how to focus better visually, if you want to bring about higher levels of cognitive or mental focus, even if you're engaged in a physical task. Now there's a remarkable phenomenon in animals where animals that have their eyes on the side of their head are scanning the entire visual environment all the time. They're not focused on anything. Think you're grazing animals, your cows, your sheep your birds, et cetera. But think about a bird picking up seeds on the beach or on concrete. That bird's head is up here. It's up about a foot off the ground, or if it's a small bird about six inches off the ground and its eyes are on the side of its head and yet it has this tiny beak that can quickly pick up these little seeds off the ground with immense precision. Now, if you try to do that by staring off to the sides of the room and picking up items in front of you with high precision at that tiny scale, little tiny objects, you will miss almost every time. They do it perfectly and they don't smash their beak into the ground and damage it, they do it with beautiful movement acuity also. So how do they do it? How do they create this focus or this awareness of what's in front of them? It turns out as they lower their head, their eyes, very briefly move inward, in what's called a vergence eye movement. Now their eyes can't actually translocate in their head, they're fixed in the skull, just like yours and mine are. But when we move our eyes slightly inward, maybe you can tell and do it's like so basically shortening or making the inter pupillary distance as it's called smaller. Two things happen. Not only do we develop a smaller visual window into the world, but we activate a set of neurons in our brainstem that trigger the release of both norepinephrine, epinephrin and acetylcholine. Norepinephrine is kind of similar to epinephrin. So in other words, when our eyes are relaxed in our head when we're just kind of looking at our entire visual environment, moving our head around, moving through space we're in optic flow, things moving past us or we're sitting still, we're looking broadly at our space, we're relaxed. When our eyes move slightly inward toward a particular visual target our visual world shrinks, our level of visual focus goes up and we know that this relates to the release of acetylcholine and epinephrin at the relevant sites in the brain for plasticity. Now, what this means is that if you have a hard time focusing your mind for sake of reading or for listening, you need to practice and you can practice focusing your visual system. Now this works best if you practice focusing your visual system at the precise distance, from the work that you intend to do for sake of plasticity. So how would this look in the real world? Let's say, I am trying to concentrate on something related to, I don't know, science, I'm reading a science paper and I'm having a hard time, it's not absorbing. I might think that I'm only looking at the paper that I'm reading. I'm only looking at my screen, but actually my eyes are probably darting around a bit. Experiments have been done on this. Or I'm gathering information from too many sources in the visual environment. Now, presumably because it's me, I've already had my coffee, I'm hydrated. I'm well rested, I slept well. And I still experienced these challenges in focusing spending just 60 to 120 seconds focusing my visual attention on a small window of my screen, meaning just on my screen with nothing on it, but bringing my eyes to that particular location increases not just my visual acuity for that location but it brings about an increase in activity in a bunch of other brain areas that are associated with gathering information from this location. So put simply, if you want to improve your ability to focus practice visual focus. Now, if you wear contacts or you wear corrective lenses, that's fine. You of course would want to use those. You don't want to take those off and use a blurry image. The finer the visual image and the more that you can hold your gaze to the visual image, the higher your levels of attention will be. Many times on Instagram and here I've been teased for not blinking very often. That's actually a practiced thing. We blink more as we get tired, which as you hear it you'll probably just say, duh. As we get tired, the neurons in the brainstem that are responsible for alertness and that hold the eyelids open start to falter and our eyelids start to close. This is why it's hard, the words, "I could barely keep my eyes open" which may be how you feel right now. But assuming that you're paying attention and you're alert, when you're very alert, your eyes are wide, your eyes are open. And as you get tired, your eyelids start to close. Blinks, actually reset our perception of time and space. This was shown in a beautiful paper in Current Biology. I'll be sure to post the reference in the notes. And blinking of course is necessary to lubricate the eyes. People blink because their eyes might get dry. But if you can keep focused by blinking less and by focusing your eyes to a particular location that's probably pretty creepy for you to experience as I'm doing this. But the more that you can do this the more that you can maintain a kind of a cone or a tunnel of mental focus. And so I'm sort of revealing my practice which is that I've worked very hard through blinking contest with my 14-year-old niece who still beats me every time and it really bothers me, but also just through my own self practice of learning to blink less and focus my visual attention on a smaller region of space. Now for me, that's important because I'm mainly learning things on a computer screen. If you're going to be doing sport, it's quite a bit different and we can discuss how you might translate to that to sport. In fact, in the next episode, I'm going to talk all about how plasticity and the focus mechanisms relate to learning of movement practices and coordinated movements. It's an entire discussion unto itself but the same principle holds. So we need alertness. You can get that through mental tricks of motivation, fear or love, whatever it is, pharmacology, please do it healthfully. You know, caffeine if that's in your practice, certainly want to be well hydrated that increases actually will increase alertness. Well, having a very full bladder will increase alertness although you don't want your alertness to be so high that all you can think about is the fact that you have to go urinate 'cause that's very distracting. You don't want your alertness to go through the roof. You need focus and visual focus is the primary way in which we start to deploy these neurochemicals. Now you may ask, well, what about the experiment where people were feeling this rotating drum or listening to the auditory cue that doesn't involve vision at all? If you look at people who are learning things with their auditory system, they will often close their eyes. And that's not a coincidence. If somebody is listening very hard, please don't ask them to look you directly in the eye while also asking that they listen to you. That's actually one of the worst ways to get somebody to listen to you. If you say, now listen to me and look me in the eye. The visual system will take over and they'll see your mouth move, but they're going to hear their thoughts more than they're going to hear what you're saying. Closing the eyes is one of the best ways to create a cone of auditory attention. And this is what low vision or no vision folks do. They have tremendous capacity to focus their attention in particular locations. Incidentally does anyone know the two animals that have the best hearing in the world? The absolute best hearing is many orders of magnitude better than humans. It turns out it's the elephant. That might not surprise you, they have huge ears and the moth which probably will surprise you. I didn't even know that moths could hear. but now it explains why they're so hard to catch. If you are not sighted, you learn how to do this with your hearing. If you're somebody who braille reads, you learn how to do this with your fingers. If you look at great piano players like Glenn Gould, they often times will turn their head to the side. You think about some of the great musicians like Stevie Wonder that were blind, right? He would look away because he had no reason to look at the keys, but oftentimes they'll orient an ear or one side of their head to the keys on the piano. As I mentioned before, people who are non-sighted have better pitch. So we have these cones of attention that we can devote. And for most people, vision is the primary way to train up this focus of building these cones of attention. So you absolutely have to focus on the thing that you're trying to learn. And you will feel some agitation because of the epinephrin in your system. If you're feeling agitation and it's challenging to focus and you're feeling like you're not doing it right chances are you're doing it right. And you can practice this ability to stare for long periods of time without blinking. I know it's a little eerie for people to watch, but if your goal is to learn how to control that visual window for sake of controlling your focus, it can be an immensely powerful portal into these mechanisms of plasticity, because we know it engages things like nucleus basalis and these other brainstem mechanisms. I get a lot of questions about attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, ADHD, and attention deficit disorder. Some people actually have clinically diagnosed ADD and ADHD. And if you do, you should certainly work with a good psychiatrist to try and figure out the right pharmacology and/or behavioral practices for you. Many people, however, have given themselves a low grade ADHD or ADD because of the way that they move through their world. They are looking at their phone a lot of the time. It's actually very easy to anchor your attention to your phone for the following reason. First of all, it's very restricted in size. So it's very easy to limit your visual attention to something about this big. It's one of the design features of the phone. The other, is that just as you've probably heard a picture is worth a thousand words, well, a movie is worth 10,000 pictures. Anytime we're looking at things that have motion, visual motion, our attentional system will naturally gravitate towards them, towards those movies. It's actually much harder to read words on a page than it used to be for many people, because we're used to seeing things spelled out for us in YouTube videos or videos where things move in a very dramatic. It is true that the more that we look at those motion stimulate, the more that we're seeing movies of things and things that are very dramatic and very intense, the worst we're getting at attending to things like text on a page or to listening to something like a podcast and extracting the information so much so that I think many people have asked me, "Hey you know what, why aren't you providing intense visuals for us to look at?" Well, frankly, it's because a lot of people are consuming this content through pure auditory, through, it's by listening. And I want them to be able to digest all the material. But in addition to that, if you think about the areas of life that dictate whether or not we become successful, independent, healthy individuals, most of those involve the kind of boring practices of digesting information on a page. Boring because it's not as exciting in the moment perhaps as watching a movie or something being spoonfed to us. But the more attention that we can put to something, even if it's fleeting and we feel like we're only getting little bits and pieces, shards of the information as opposed to the entire thing, that has a much more powerful effect in engaging this cholinergic system for plasticity than does, for instance, watching a movie. And that's because when we watch a movie, the entire thing can be great, it can be awesome. It can be this overriding experience but I think for all those experiences, if you're somebody who's interested in building your brain and expanding your brain and getting better at various things, in feeling better, doing better, et cetera, one has to ask how much of my neurochemical resources am I devoting to the passive experience of letting something, just kind of overwhelm me and excite me, versus something that I'm really trying to learn and take away. And now there's another I enjoy movie content and TV content all the time. I scroll Instagram often. But we are limited in the extent to which we can grab a hold of these acetylcholine release mechanisms or epinephrin. And I think that we need to be careful that we don't devote all our acetylcholine and epinephrin, all our dopamine for that matter to these passive experiences of things that are not going to enrich us and better us. So that's a little bit of an editorial on my part but the phone is rich with movies, it's rich with information. The real question is is the information rich for us in ways that grow us and cultivate smarter, more emotionally, you know emotionally evolved people, or is it creating what's it doing for our physical wellbeing for that matter? So I don't want to tell people what to do or not to do but think carefully about how often you're focusing on something and how good you are or poor you are at focusing on something that's challenging. So once you get this epinephrin, this alertness, you get the acetylcholine released and you can focus your attention. Then the question is for how long? And in an earlier podcast, I talked about these ultradian cycles that lasts about 90 minutes. The typical learning about should be about 90 minutes. I think that learning about will no doubt include five to 10 minutes of warmup period. I think everyone should give themselves permission to not be fully focused in the early part of that about. But that in the middle of that about for the middle hour or so you should be able to maintain focus for about an hour or so. So that for me means eliminating distractions. That means turning off the wifi. I put my phone in the other room. If I find myself reflexively getting up to get the phone I will take the phone and lock it in the car outside. If I find myself going to get it anyway, I am guilty of giving away the phone for a period of time or even things more dramatic, I've thrown it up on my roof before so I can't get to it till the end of the day. That thing is pretty compelling and we come up with all sorts of reasons why we need it, to be in contact with it but I encourage you to try experiencing what it is to be completely immersed in an activity where you feel the agitation that your attention is drifting but you continually bring it back. And that's an important point which is that attention drifts, but we have to re-anchor it. We have to keep grabbing it back. And the way to do that, if you're sighted is with your eyes. That as your attention drifts, and you look away you want to try and literally maintain visual focus on the thing that you're trying to learn. Feel free to blink, of course, but you can greatly increase your powers of focus and the rates of learning which is anchored in all the work of Merzenich, Hubel and Wiesel and others. Now that's the trigger for plasticity, but the real secret is that neuroplasticity doesn't occur during wakefulness. It occurs during sleep. We now know that if you focus very hard on something for about 90 minutes or so, maybe you even do several bouts of that per day. If you can do that, some people can, some people can only do one focus about of learning, that night and the following nights, while you're asleep the neural circuits that were highlighted if you will with acetylcholine transmission will strengthen and other will be lost, which is wonderful because that's the essence of plasticity. And what it means is that when you eventually wake up a couple of days or a week later, you will will have acquired the knowledge forever unless you go through some process to actively unlearn it. And we will talk about unlearning in a later episode. So mastering sleep is key in order to reinforce the learning that occurs. But let's say you get a really poor night of sleep after a about of learning. Chances are, if you sleep the next night or the following night that learning will occur. There's a stamp in the brain where this acetylcholine was released. It actually marks those synapses neurochemically and metabolically, so that those are synopses are more biased to change. Now, if you don't ever get that deep sleep then you probably won't get those changes. There's also a way in which you can bypass the need for deep sleep at least partially by engaging in what I call Non Sleep Deep Rest, these NSDR protocols. But I just want to discuss the signs of this. There was a paper that was published in Cell Reports last year that shows that if people did, it was a spatial memory task, actually quite difficult one where they had to remember the sequence of lights lighting up and if they're just two or three lights in a particular sequence it's easy but as you get up to 15 or 16 lights and numbers in the sequence it actually gets quite challenging. If immediately after, and it was immediately after the learning the actual performance of this task, people took a 20 minute Non Sleep Deep Rest protocol or took a shallow nap, so lying down, feet slightly elevated perhaps, just closing their eyes, no sensory input, the rates of learning were significantly higher for that information than where the two just had a good night's sleep the following night. So you can actually accelerate learning with these NSDR protocols or with brief naps, 90 minutes or less. So the key to plasticity in childhood is to be a child. The key to plasticity in adulthood is to engage alertness, engage focus and then to engage Non Sleep Deep Rest and deep sleep while you're in your typical about of sleep. I always get asked, "How many bouts of learning can I perform?" Well, I know people that train up these visual focus mechanisms to the point where they can do several 90 minute bouts throughout the day, as many as three or four. And some of them are also inserting Non Sleep Deep Rest as well. Now that can get pretty tricky. A lot of people find that they can recover best from these intense bouts of focused learning by doing some motor activity where you get into self-generated optic flow. And that should make sense if you've ever heard me lecture about stress which I've done a little bit in various podcasts. When we are in a mode of self-generated optic flow like walking or running or cycling and things are just floating past us on our retina, we're not really looking anywhere in particular, so this is the opposite of a tight window of focus. When we do that, there are areas of the brain like the amygdala which are involved in releasing epinephrin and create alertness. At the extremes, it creates fear but certainly alertness, those are all shut down. So it's its own form of non sleep deep rest. So some people find it much more pleasurable and practical to engage in a focused about of learning and then go do some activity that involves what we would essentially call worldlessness where you're not really thinking about much of anything. And so for those of you that listen to audio books or podcasts while you run you may want to consider whether or not that's how you want to spend your time right now. I'd love it if you were listening to this podcast while you run or cycle, but I'm much more interested in you actually getting the benefits of neuroplasticity than just listening to me for the sake of listening to me. So for many people letting the mind drift where it's not organized in thought after a period of very deliberate focused effort is the best way to accelerate learning and depth of learning. And there are good scientific data to support these sorts of things, including the Cell Reports paper that I mentioned a few moments ago. I want to synthesize some of the information that we've covered up until now. This entire month is about neuroplasticity. Today's episode has covered a lot, but by no means has it covered all of the potential for neuroplasticity and protocols for plasticity. We will get into all of it. But today I want to make sure that these key elements that form the backbone of neuroplasticity are really embedded in people's minds. First of all, plasticity occurs throughout the lifespan. Early, from birth until 25, mere exposure to a sensory event can create plasticity. That could be a good thing or a bad thing. We're going to talk about unlearning the bad stuff, traumas, et cetera in a subsequent episode this month. If you want to learn as an adult, you have to be alert. It might seem so obvious but I think a lot of people don't think about when in their 24 hour cycle, they're most alert. There are four episodes devoted to that 24-hour cycle and the cycles of alertness and sleep. I encourage you to listen to those if you haven't had the opportunity to yet or just ask yourself when during the day do you typically tend to be most alert? That will afford you an advantage in learning specific things during that period of time. So don't give up that period of time for things that are meaningless, useless, or not aligned with your goals. That'd be a terrible time to get into passive observance or just letting your time get soaked away by something. That is a valuable asset, that epinephrin, released from your brainstem is going to occur more readily at particular phases of your 24-hour cycle than others, during the waking phase of course. You should know when those are. And then you could start to think about the behavioral practices, maybe the pharmacologic practices like caffeine, hydration, et cetera that will support heightened levels of alertness. Attention is something that can be learned and attention is critical for creating that condition where whatever it is that you are engaging in will modify your brain in a way that you won't have to spend so much attention on it going forward. That's the essence of plasticity, that things will eventually become reflexive. The language that you're learning, the motor movement, the cognitive skill, the ability to suppress an emotional response or to engage in emotional response depending on what your goals are and what's appropriate for you. Increasing acetylcholine can be accomplished pharmacologically through nicotine. However, there are certain dangers for many people to do that as well as the cost, financial cost, learning how to engage the cholinergic system through the use of the visual system, practicing how long can you maintain focus with blinks as you need them, but how long can you maintain visual focus on a target, just on a piece of paper set a few feet away in the room or at the level of your computer screen. These are actually things that people do in communities where high levels of visual focus are necessary. Now, the other way to get high levels of visual focus and alertness is to have a panic or to have a situation that's very, very bad. You will be immediately focused on everything related to that situation, but that's unfortunate. What we're really talking about here is trying to harness the mechanisms of attention and get better at paying attention. You may want to do that with your auditory system, not with your visual system, either because you're low vision or no vision, or because you're trying to learn something that relates more to sounds than to what you see. But for most people they're trying to learn information, cognitive information, or they're trying to learn how to hear the nuance in their partner's explanations of their emotionally challenging events, et cetera. And just remember, by the way, what I said earlier, which is that if you really want somebody to listen to you and really hear what you're saying and what's underlying it, you should not, and cannot expect them to look directly at you while you do that. That's actually going to limit their ability to focus. I'm trying to rescue a few folks out there who might be in this struggle. I of course have never been in this struggle. And that was supposed to be a joke. I'm very familiar with that struggle but I know that one can get better at listening, one can get better at learning, one can get better at all sorts of things by anchoring in these mechanisms. Now, of course you can also combine protocols. You can decide to combine pharmacology with these learning practices. Many people in communities do that. Many people are doing that naturally by drinking their coffee right before they do their learning. But I would also encourage you to think about how long those learning bouts are. If you think you have ADD or ADHD, see a clinician but you should also ask yourself are you giving up the best period of focus that you have each day naturally to some other thing like social media or some other activity that doesn't serve you well or are you devoting that period to the opportunity to learn? You should also ask yourself whether or not you're trying to focus too much for too long during the day. I know some very high performing individuals, very high-performing in a variety of contexts and none of them are focused all day long. Many of them take walks down the hallway, sometimes mumbling to themselves, they're not paying attention to anything else. They go for bike rides, they take walks. They are not trying to engage their mind at maximum focus all the time. Very few people do that because we learn best in these 90 minute bouts inside of one of these ultradian cycles. And I should repeat again, that within that 90-minute cycle, you should not expect yourself to focus for the entire period of one 90-minute cycle. The beginning and end are going to be a little bit flickering in and out of focus. How do you know when one of these 90-minute cycles is starting, or typically when you wake up os the beginning of the first 90-minute cycle, but it's not down to the minute. You'll be able to tap into your sense of these 90-minute cycles as you start to engage in these learning practices should you choose. And then of course getting some non sleep deep rest or just deliberate disengagement, such as walking or running, or just sitting, eyes closed or eyes open you kind of mindlessly it might seem in a chair, just letting your thoughts move around after a learning about will accelerate the rate of plasticity that's been shown in quality peer reviewed studies. And then of course, deep sleep. And so what we can start to see is that plasticity is your natural right early in life. But after about age 25 you have to do some work in order to access it. But fortunately, these beautiful experiments of Hubel and Wiesel and Merzenich and Weinberger and others point in the direction of what allows us to achieve plasticity, it points to the neurochemicals and the circuits. And we now have behavioral protocols that allow us to do that. I also really want to emphasize that there's an entire other aspect of behavioral practices that will allow us to engage in plasticity that don't involve intense focus on emotionality but involve a lot of repetition. So there's another entire category of plasticity that involves doing what seemed like almost mundane things but doing them over and over again repeatedly and incorporating the reward system that involves dopamine. So today I talked about the kind of plasticity that comes from extreme focus. You would get that extreme focus and alertness naturally through a harder, difficult event that you didn't want. That's the kind of stinger but your brain is designed to keep you safe so it wants to get one trial learning from things like touching a hot stove or engaging with a really horrible person. You can get incredible plasticity of positive experiences of things that you want by engaging this high focus regime and then rest, non sleep deep rest, and sleep. And there's another aspect of plasticity which we will explore next episode as well as when we explore movement-based practices for enhancing plasticity and plasticity of movement itself. And those are not of the high attention kind of high emotionality or in the intensity of the experiences that I described today. Those are more about repetition and reward and repeat, repetition, reward, repeat, and they are used for a distinctly different category of behavioral change more of which relate to habits as opposed to learning of particular types of information that allow us to perform physically, cognitively or adjust our emotional system. So I'm going to stop there. I'm sure there are a lot of questions. Please put your questions in the comment section below and please remember that this entire month we're going to be exploring neuroplasticity. So this discussion/lecture, I wish it was more of a back and forth, but this is what the format offers us. So please do put your questions in the comment section and I will address them in the other episodes coming soon on neuroplasticity. As I say that I'm reminded that many of you are listening to this on Apple or Spotify and therefore there isn't an opportunity to leave comments aside from the rating section on Apple. So if you have specific topics related to neuroplasticity that you would like me to cover in the subsequent episodes this month please go to the YouTube, subscribe, but as well please put your question in the comment section for this episode and I'll be sure to read them and respond. Many of you have very graciously asked how you can help support the Huberman Lab Podcast. Best way to do that is to subscribe on YouTube. You might want to also hit the notification button so that you don't miss any upcoming episodes. Leave a comment, as well if you go to Apple, you can give us a 5-star rating and there's a place there where also you can leave a comment. And if you prefer to listen on Spotify subscribe and download on Spotify. In addition, it's always helpful if you recommend the podcast to your friends and family and others who you think might benefit from the information and as well, please check out our sponsors. That's a great way to help us. Today and in previous episodes, I've talked a number of times about supplements. I'm very pleased that we're partnering with Thorne, T-h-o-r-n-e supplements because Thorne has the very high levels of stringency in terms of product quality and precision about how much of given supplements are in the bottle which is vital and not all supplement companies have stood up to the test on that one. If you want to check out Thorne and go to Thorne that's thorne.com/u/huberman. And if you do that, you'll get 20% off any supplements that you purchase. I've also listed there a gallery of supplements that I take, including magnesium glycinate. I know in previous episodes, I talked about magnesium threonate as a sleep aid that I take. magnesium glycinate and magnesium threonate are essentially interchangeable. Thanks so much for your time and attention, and as always thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 344 ---
Video ID: FFwA0QFmpQ4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FFwA0QFmpQ4
Title: Understand and Use Dreams to Learn and Forget
Published: 2021-02-01 13:00:05 UTC
Description:
This episode is all about the two major kinds of dreams and the sorts of learning and unlearning they are used for. I discuss REM-associated dreams that control emotional learning and their similarity to various trauma treatments such as ketamine and EMDR. I also discuss Non-REM dreams and their role in motor learning and learning of detailed, non-emotionally-laden information. I relate this to science-backed tools for accessing more of the types of sleep and learning people may want. Other topics are listed in the time stamps below. Please put any questions or thoughts (or dreams!) you have in the comments section. 

For an updated list of our current sponsors, please visit our website as previous sponsors mentioned in this podcast episode may no longer be affiliated with us: https://hubermanlab.com/sponsors

Social:
Instagram - https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab
Twitter - https://twitter.com/hubermanlab
Facebook - https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab

Website - https://hubermanlab.com
Join the Neural Network - https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Timestamps below.
00:00 Introduction
03:00 The Dream Mask
06:00 Cycling Sleep
08:10 Chemical Cocktails of Sleep
13:00 Motor Learning
16:30 High Performance with Less Sleep
17:45 Rapid Eye Movement Sleep
20:30 Paralysis & Hallucinations
23:35 Nightmares
24:45 When REM & Waking Collide
25:00 Sleeping While Awake
26:45 Alien Abductions
29:00 Irritability 
30:00 Sleep to Delete
32:25 Creating Meaning
34:10 Adults Acting Like Children
36:20 Trauma & REM
37:15 EMDR
39:10 Demo
44:25 Ketamine / PCP
45:45 Soup, Explosions, & NMDA
48:55 Self Therapy
50:30 Note About Hormones
51:40 Measuring REM / SWS
53:15 Sleep Consistency
56:00 Bed Wetting
58:00 Serotonin 
59:00 Increasing SWS
59:50 Lucidity 
1:02:15 Booze / Weed
1:03:50 Scripting Dreams
1:04:35 Theory of Mind
1:07:55 Synthesis
1:10:00 Intermittent Sleep Deprivation
1:11:10 Snoring Disclaimer
1:11:40 New Topic
1:15:50 Corrections
1:17:25 Closing Remarks 

#HubermanLab

Transcript Language: English (United States)
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [upbeat music] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire to bring you zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Helix Sleep. Helix Sleep makes mattresses that are ideally suited to your sleep needs. Helix mattresses are amazing. I can say this because I've been sleeping on one and I've been sleeping better than I've ever slept before. The interesting thing about Helix mattresses is that they're tailored to your unique body type and sleeping style. What's a sleeping style? Well, if you go to the Helix site you can take a quick quiz, it takes about two minutes, as to whether or not you sleep on your stomach, your side, your back, whether or not you flip back and forth, or whether or not you don't know in what position you sleep, as well as whether or not you tend to run hot or run cold, wake up cold, wake up hot, et cetera. If you do that then it will match you to the mattress that's perfect for your sleep needs. If you wanna try a Helix mattress, you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman. And if you do that, you'll get $200 off your order as well as two free pillows. That's helixsleep.com/huberman. The second sponsor of today's podcast is Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I've been using Athletic Greens since 2012, and I started using it because I had a lot of confusion about what vitamins and minerals I should take. And taking Athletic Greens allowed me to get the foundation or sort of the base of everything I need in one easy to consume formula. It tastes great. I mix mine with water and a little bit of lemon juice, and I like drinking it. And the probiotics in there are important to me as well, because there are a lot of data out there now identifying the gut microbiome and the importance of the gut-brain axis for immune function, metabolic function and so forth. If you want to try Athletic Greens you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman. And if you do that they'll also send you a year supply of liquid vitamin D3, K2. There are a lot of data starting to surface about the importance of vitamin D3 for immune function, metabolic function, endocrine function, and so forth. In addition, if you go to athleticgreens.com/huberman, you'll get the year supply of D3 and K2 as well as five free travel packs, which are a little packets of Athletic Greens in addition to your normal order. And those are great for when you're on the plane, or you're otherwise traveling. They mix up really easily without any mess or the needs of spoon out powder and things of that sort. So the things that are easy to do at home are kind of harder on the road, those packets make it easy while on the road. Today we're gonna talk about dreaming, learning during dreaming and unlearning during dreaming. In particular unlearning of troubling emotional events. Now my interest in dreaming goes way back. When I was a child I had a friend and he came over one day and he brought with him a mask that had a little red light in the corner. He had purchased this thing through some magazine ad that he had seen, and this mask was supposed to trigger lucid dreaming. Lucid dreaming is the experience of dreaming during sleep, but being aware that one is dreaming. And in some cases being able to direct one's dream activities. So if you're in a lucid dream and you wanna fly, for instance, some people report being able to initiate that experience of flying. Or to contort themselves into an animal, or to transport themselves to wherever they want within the dream. I tried this device. The way it worked is you put on the mask during a waking state, I'm wide awake, and you look at the little light flashing in the corner, and then you'd also wear it when you went to sleep at night. And indeed, while I was asleep I could see the red light presumably through my eyelids. Although, for all I know I had opened my eyes. I don't know I was asleep. And then, because I was dreaming and I was experiencing something very vivid, I was able to recognize that I was dreaming and then start to direct some of the events within that dream. Now lucid dreaming occurs in about 20% of people and in a small percentage of those people they lucid dream almost every night. So much so that many of them report their sleep not being as restorative as it would be otherwise. Now all of this is to say that, lucid dreaming and dreaming are profound experiences. We tend to feel extremely attached to our dream experience. This may explain the phenomenon of people who have a very intense dream they need to somehow tell everybody about that dream, or tell someone about that dream. I don't really know what that behavior is about, but sometimes we wake up and we feel so attached to what happened in this state that we call dreaming that there seems to be an intense need to share it with other people, presumably to process it and make sense of it. Now numerous people throughout history have tried to make sense of dreams in some sort of organized way. The most famous of which of course is a Sigmund Freud who talked about symbolic representations in dreams. A lot of that has been kind of debunked. Although, I think that there's some interest in what the symbols of dreaming are. And this is something that we'll talk about in more depth today, although not Freud in theory, in particular. So I think in order to really think about dreams and what to do with them and how to maximize the dream experience for sake of learning and unlearning, the best way to address this is to look at the physiology of sleep, to really address what do we know concretely about sleep. So first of all, as we get sleepy we tend to shut our eyes, and that's 'cause there's some autonomic centers in the brain, some neurons that control closing of the eyelids when we get sleepy. And then we transitioned into sleep. And sleep, regardless of how long we sleep is generally broken up into a series of 90 minute cycles. These ultradian cycles. So early in the night these 90 minute cycles tend to be comprised more of shallow sleep and slow wave sleep. So stage one, stage two, et cetera, and what we call slow wave sleep. I'll go into detail about what all this means in a moment. And we tend to have less so-called REM sleep, R-E-M sleep, which stands for rapid eye movement sleep. And I'll talk about rapid eye movement sleep in detail. So early in the night, a lot more slow wave sleep and less REM. For every 90 minute cycle that we have during a night of sleep we tend to start having more and more REM sleep. So more of that 90 minute cycle is comprised of REM sleep and less of slow wave sleep. Now this is true regardless of whether or not you wake up in the middle of the night to use the restroom or your sleep is broken. The more sleep you're getting across the night, the more REM sleep you're going to have. And REM sleep and non REM, as I'll refer to it, have distinctly different roles in learning and unlearning, and they are responsible for learning and unlearning of distinctly different types of information. And this has enormous implications for learning of motor skills, for unlearning of traumatic events, or for processing emotionally challenging as well as emotionally pleasing events. And as we'll see, one can actually leverage their daytime activities in order to access more slow wave sleep or non REM sleep as we'll call it, or more REM sleep depending on your particular emotional and physical needs. So it's really a remarkable stage of life that we have a lot more control and power over then you might believe. We'll also talk about lucid dreaming. We're also gonna talk about hallucinations and how drug induced hallucinations have a surprising similarity to a lot of dream states and yet some really important differences. Okay. So let's start by talking about slow wave sleep, or non REM sleep. And I realized that slow wave sleep and non REM sleep aren't exactly the same thing. So for you sleep aficionados out there, I am lumping right now. As we say in science, there are lumpers and there are splitters and I am both. Sometimes I lump, sometimes I split. For sake of clarity and ease of conversation right now I'm gonna be a lumper. When I say slow wave sleep, I mean non REM sleep generally. Although, I acknowledge there is a distinction. Slow wave sleep. So slow wave sleep is characterized by a particular pattern of brain activity in which the brain is metabolically active, but that there's these big sweeping waves of activity that include a lot of the brain. If you wanna look this up you can find evidence for sweeping of waves of neural activity across association cortex, across big swaths of the brainstem, the so-called pons geniculate occipital pathway. This is brainstem, thalamus, and then cortex for those of you that are interested. Although, more of that is going to occur in REM sleep. Now the interesting thing about slow wave sleep are the neuromodulators that tend to be associated with it, that are most active and least active during slow wave sleep and here's why. To remind you neuromodulators are these chemicals that act rather slowly but their main role is to bias particular brain circuits to be active and other brain circuits to not be active. These are like the music playlist. So think of neuromodulators and these come in the names of, acetylcholine, norepinephrine, serotonin, and dopamine, think of them as suggesting playlists on your audio device. So, you know, classical music is distinctly different in feel and tone and a number of other features from like third wave punk, or from, you know, hip hop, right? So think of them as biasing toward particular genres of neural circuit activity, okay. Mellow music versus really aggressive fast music, or rhythmic music that includes lyrics versus rhythmic music that doesn't include lyrics. It's more or less the way to think about these neuromodulators. And they are associated as a consequence with certain brain functions. So we know for instance and just to review, acetylcholine in waking states is a neuromodulator that tends to amplify the activity of brain circuits associated with focus and attention. Norepinephrine is a neuromodulator that tends to amplify the brain circuits associated with alertness, and the desire to move. Serotonin is the neuromodulator that's released intense to amplify the circuits in the brain and body that are associated with bliss and the desire to remain still. And dopamine is the neuromodulator that's released and is associated with amplification of the neural circuits in the brain and body associated with pursuing goals and pleasure and reward. Okay. So in slow wave sleep something really interesting happens. There is essentially no acetylcholine. Acetylcholine production and release and action from the two major sites, which are in the brainstem, which from a nucleus if it's a parabigerminal nucleus, if you really wanna know, or from the forebrain, which is nucleus basalis. And you don't need to know these names but if you like, that's why I put them out there. Acetylcholine production plummets. It's just almost to zero. And acetylcholine as I just mentioned, is associated with focus. So you can think of slow wave sleep as these big sweeping waves of activity through the brain and a kind of distortion of space and time, so that we're not really focusing on any one thing. Now the other molecules that are very active at that time are norepinephrine. Which is a little bit surprising 'cause normally in waking states norepinephrine is gonna be associated with a lot of alertness and the desire to move. But there's not a ton of norepinephrine around in slow wave sleep, but it is around. So there's something associated with the movement circuitry going on in slow wave sleep. And remember, this is happening mostly at the beginning of the night, your sleep is dominated by slow wave sleep. So no acetylcholine, very little norepinephrine, although there is some and a lot of serotonin. And serotonin again is associated with this desire, this sensation of kind of bliss or wellbeing, but not a lot of movement. And during sleep you tend not to move. Now in slow wave sleep you can move, you're not paralyzed. So you can roll over. If people are going to sleep walk, typically it's going to be during slow wave sleep. And what studies have shown through some kind of sadistic experiments where people are deprived specifically of slow wave sleep, and that can be done by waking them up as soon as the electrode recording show that they're in slow wave sleep or by chemically altering their sleep so that it biases them away from slow wave sleep. What studies have shown is that motor learning is generally occurring in slow wave sleep. So let's say the day before you go to sleep you were learning some new dance move, or you were learning some specific motor skill, either a fine motor skill or a course motor skill. So let's say, it's a new form of exercise or some new coordinated movements. This could be coordinate movement at the level of the fingers, or it could be coordinated movement the level of whole body and large limb movements. It could involve other people, or it could be a solo activity. Learning of those skills is happening primarily during slow wave sleep in the early part of the night. In addition, slow wave sleep has been shown to be important for the learning of detailed information. Now this isn't always cognitive information. We're gonna talk about cognitive information, but the studies that have been done along these lines involve having people learn very detailed information about very specific rules and the way that certain words are spelled, they tend to be challenging words. So if people are tested and in terms of their performance on these types of exams and they're deprived of slow wave sleep, they tend to perform very poorly. So we can think of slow wave sleep as important for motor learning, motor skill learning and for the learning of specific details about specific events. And this turns out to be fundamentally important because now we know that slow wave sleep is primarily in the early part of the night, and motor learning is occurring primarily early in the night, and detailed learning is occurring early in the night. Now for those of you that are waking up after only three, four hours of sleep, this might be informative. This might tell you a little something about what you are able to learn and not able to learn if that were to be the only sleep that you get. Although, hopefully that's not the only sleep that you get. But we're going to dive deep into how it is that one can maximize motor learning in order to extract say, more detail information about coordinated movements and how to make them faster or slower. So that might be important for certain sports. It might be almost certainly important for certain sports. It's gonna be important for any kind of coordinated movement, like say learning to play the piano, or for instance, how to learn synchronized movements with somebody else. So maybe I mentioned the example of dance earlier. Like me a few years ago, I set out to learn tango because I have some Argentine relatives and I was a Bismal. I need to return to that at some point. I was just a Bismal. And one of the worst things about being a bismal at learning dance is that, that somebody else has to suffer the consequences also. So I don't know maybe in the month on neuroplasticity, I'll explore that again as a self experimentation. But, the key things to know are slow wave sleep is involved in motor learning and detailed learning. There's no acetylcholine around at that time, has these big amplitude activity sweeping throughout the brain and that there's the release of these neuromodulators, norepinephrine and serotonin. And again, that's all happening early in the night. So athletes, people that are concerned about performance, if you happen to wake up after just a couple hours of, you know, three, four hours of sleep because you're excited about a competition the next day, presumably if you've already trained the skills that you need for the event you should be fine to engage in that particular activity. Now it's always going to be better to get a full night's sleep. And that, you know, a full night's sleep for you is six hours then it's always gonna be better to get more sleep than it is to get less. However, I think some people get a little bit overly concerned that if they didn't get their full night's sleep before some sort of physical event that their performance is going to plummet. Presumably, if you've already learned what you need to do, and it's stored in your neural circuits and you know how to make those coordinated movements, what the literature on slow wave sleep suggest is that you would be replenished. That the motor learning and the recovery from exercise is going to happen early in the night. Okay. So we'll just pause there, and kind of shelve that for a moment and then we're gonna come back to it. But I wanna talk about REM sleep, or rapid eye movement sleep. REM sleep and rapid eye movement sleep, as I mentioned before, occurs throughout the night, but you're gonna have more of it. A larger percentage of these 90 minute sleep cycles is going to be comprised of REM sleep as you get toward morning. REM sleep is fascinating. It was discovered in '50s when a sleep laboratory in Chicago, the researchers observed that people's eyes were moving under their eyelids. Now, something very important that we're going to address when we talk about trauma later is that, the eye movements are not just side to side they're very erratic in all different directions. One thing that I don't think I've never heard anyone really talk about publicly is, why eye movements during sleep, right? Eyes are closed. And sometimes people's eyelids will be a little bit open and their eyes are darting around, especially in little kids. I don't suggest you do this. I'm not even sure it's ethical. But, it has been done where you, you know, pull back the eyelids of a kid while they're sleeping and their eyes are kind of darting all over the place. I think people do this to their passed out friends at parties and things like that. So again, I don't suggest you do it, but I'm telling you it because it's been done before and therefore you don't have to do it again. But rapid eye movement sleep is fascinating and occurs because there are connections between the brainstem, an area called the pons, and areas of the thalamus and the top of the brain stem that are involved in generating movements in different directions, sometimes called saccades. Although, sometimes during rapid eye movement sleep it's not just rapid, it's kind of a jittery side to side thing and then the eyeballs kind of role. It's really pretty creepy to look at if you see. So what's happening there is the circuitry that is involved in conscious eye movements is kind of going haywire, but it's not haywire. It's these waves of activity from the brainstem up to the so-called thalamus, which is an area that filter sensory information and then up to the cortex. And the cortex of course, is involved in conscious perceptions. So in rapid eye movement sleep there are a couple of things are happening besides rapid eye movements. The main ones are that they're, I should say, in contrast to slow wave sleep. In REM sleep serotonin is essentially absent. Okay? So this molecule, this neuromodulator that tends to create the feeling of bliss and wellbeing and just calm placidity is absent. All right. So that's interesting. In addition to that, norepinephrine this molecule that's involved in movement and alertness is absolutely absent. It's probably one of the few times in our life that epinephrin is essentially at zero activity within our system. And that has a number of very important implications for the sorts of dreaming that occur during REM sleep and the sorts of learning that can occur in REM sleep and unlearning. First of all in REM sleep, we are paralyzed. We are experiencing what's called atonia, which just means that we're completely laid out and paralyzed. We also tend to experience whatever it is that we're dreaming about as a kind of hallucination, or a hallucinatory activity. Long ago I looked into hallucinations and dreaming I was just fascinated by this in high school. And there's some great books on this if you're interested in exploring the relationship between hallucinations and dreaming. The most famous of which are from a guy, a researcher at Harvard, Alan Hobson, you know, wrote a book called, Dream Drug Store. And talked all about the similarities between drugs that induce hallucinations and dreaming in REM. So you can explore that if you like. So in REM our eyes are moving, but the rest of our body is paralyzed and we are hallucinating. There's no epinephrin around. Epinephrin doesn't just create a desire to move and alertness. It is also the chemical signature of fear and anxiety. It's what's released from our adrenal glands when we experience something that's fearful or alerting. So if a car suddenly screeches in front of us, or we get a troubling text message, adrenaline is deployed into our system. Adrenaline is epinephrin, those are equivalent molecules. And epinephrin isn't just released from our adrenals it's also released within our brain. So there's this weird stage of our life that happens more toward morning, that we call REM sleep, where we're hallucinating and having these outrageous experiences in our mind, but the chemical that's associated with fear and panic and anxiety is not available to us. And that turns out to be very important. And you can imagine why that's important. It's important because it allows us to experience things, both replay of things that did occur as well as elaborate contortions of things that didn't occur. And it allows us to experience those in the absence of fear and anxiety, and that it turns out is very important for adjusting our emotional relationship to challenging things that happened to us while we were awake. Those challenging things can sometimes be in the form of social anxiety, or just having been working very hard or concern about an upcoming event, or sometimes people report for instance, dreams where they find themselves late to an exam, or naked in public, or in some sort of situation that would be very troubling to them. And that almost certainly occurs during REM sleep. So we have this incredible period of sleep in which our experience of emotionally laid in events is dissociated. It's chemically blocked from us having the actual emotion. Now probably immediately some of you are thinking, "Well, what about nightmares? I have nightmares and those carry a lot of emotion, or sometimes I'll wake up in a panic." Let's consider each of those two things separately because they are important in understanding REM sleep. There's a good chance that nightmares are occurring slow wave sleep. There are actually some drugs that I don't suggest people take. In fact so much so I'm not gonna mention them that give people very kind of scary or eerie dreams and this kind of feeling that things are pursuing them, or that they can't move when they are being chased. That's actually a common dream that I've had. I guess, it's more or less a nightmare. The feeling that one is paralyzed and can't move and is being chased. A lot of people have said, "Oh, that must be in REM sleep." Because you're paralyzed and so you're dreaming about being paralyzed and you can't move. I think that's probably false. The research says that because no epinephrine is absent during REM sleep, it's very unlikely that you can have these intense, fearful memories. So those are probably occurring in slow wave sleep. Although, there might be instances where people have nightmares in REM sleep. The other thing is some people experience, certainly I've had this experience, of waking up and feeling very stressed about whatever it was that I happen to be thinking about, or dreaming about in the moments before. And that's an interesting case of an invasion of the dream state into the waking state and the moment you wake up epinephrine is available. So the research on this isn't fully crystallized, but most of it points in the direction of the experience of waking up and feeling very panicked. Maybe, I wanna highlight may, but maybe that you were experiencing something that was troubling in the daytime, you're repeating that experience in your sleep, epinephrine is not available, and therefore the brain circuits associated with fear and anxiety are shut off. And so you're able to process those events and then suddenly you wake up and there's a surge of adrenaline of epinephrin that's now coupled to that experience. So nightmares very likely in slow wave sleep and that kind of panic on waking from something very likely to be an invasion of the thoughts and ideas, however distorted in REM sleep invading the waking state. In fact, that brings to mind something that I've mentioned once before, but I wanna mention again, this atonia, this paralysis that we experience during sleep can invade the waking state. Many people report the experience of waking up and being paralyzed. They're legitimately waking up, it's not a dream. Waking up and being paralyzed, and it is terrifying. I've had this happen before. It is I can tell you terrifying to be wide awake, and as far as I could tell fully conscious, but unable to move. And then generally you can jolt yourself out of it in a few seconds, but it is quite frightening. Now some people actually experience waking up, being fully paralyzed and hallucinating. And there is a theory in the academic and scientific community at least, that what people report as alien abductions have a certain number of core characteristics that map quite closely, yearly similarly to these experiences. A lot of reports of alien abduction involve people being unable to move, seeing particular faces, hallucinating, extensively feeling like their body is floating, or they were transported. This is very similar to the experience of invasion of atonia into the waking state, waking up and still being paralyzed. As well as the hallucinations that are characteristic of dreaming and REM sleep. Now I'm not saying that people's alien abductions were not legitimate alien abductions, how could I, I wasn't there. And if I was there I wouldn't tell you 'cause that would make me an alien, and I wouldn't want you to know. But it is quite possible that people are experiencing these things and they are an invasion of the sleep state into the waking state and they can last several minutes or longer. And because in dreams, space and time are distorted, our perception of these events could be that they lasted many hours and we can really feel as if they lasted many hours, when in fact they took only moments. And we're gonna return to distortion of space and time in a little bit. So to just recap we've gone so far. Slow wave sleep early in the night. It's been shown to be important for motor learning and for detailed learning. REM sleep has a certain dream component when which there's no epinephrin, therefore we can't experience anxiety, we are paralyzed. Those dreams tend to be really vivid and have a lot of detail to them. And yet in REM sleep what's very clear is that the sorts of learning that happened in REM sleep are not motor events. It's more about unlearning of emotional events. And now we know why, because the chemicals available for really feeling those emotions are not present. Now that has very important implications. So let's address those implications from two sides. First of all we should ask, what happens if we don't get enough REM sleep? And a scenario that happens a lot where people don't get enough REM sleep is the following. I'll just explain the one that I'm familiar with 'cause it happens to me a lot, although I figured out ways to adjust. I go to sleep around 10:30, 11:00, I fall asleep very easily and then I wake up around 3:00 or 4:00 AM. I now know to use a NSDR, a non sleep deep rest protocol and that allows me to fall back asleep. Even though it's called non sleep depressed it's really allows me to relax my body and brain, and I tend to fall back asleep and sleep till about 7:00 AM. During which time I get a lot of REM sleep. And I know this because I've measured it, and I know this because my dreams tend to be very intense of the sort that we know is typical of REM sleep. In this scenario, I've gotten my slow wave sleep early in the night and I've got my REM sleep toward morning. However, there are times when I don't go back to sleep, maybe I have a flight to catch, that's happened. Sometimes I've got a lot on my mind and I don't go back to sleep. I can tell you, and you've probably experienced that the lack of REM sleep tends to make people emotionally irritable. It tends to make us feel as if the little things are the big things. So it's very clear from laboratory studies where people have been deprived selectively of REM sleep, that our emotionality tends to get a little bit unhinged and we tend to catastrophize small things. We tend to feel like the world is really daunting, we're never gonna move forward in the ways that we want. We can't unlearn the emotional components of whatever it is that has been happening, even if it's not traumatic. The other thing that happens in REM sleep is a replay of certain types of spatial information about where we were and why we were in those places. And this maps to some beautiful data and studies that were initiated by a guy named Matt Wilson at MIT years ago. Showing that in rodents and it turns out in other non-human primates and in humans there's a replay of spacial information during REM sleep, that almost precisely maps to the activity that we experienced during the day as we move from one place to another. So here's a common world scenario, you go to a new place, you navigate through that city or that environment, this place doesn't have to be, you know, at the scale of a city. It can be a new building. It could be finding particular rooms, new social interaction. You experience that and if it's important enough, that becomes solidified a few days later and you won't forget it. If it's unimportant, you'll probably forget it. During REM sleep there's a literal replay of the exact firing of the neurons that occurred while you were navigating that same city you're building earlier. So REM sleep seems to be involved in the generation of this detailed spatial information. But, what is it that's actually happening in REM sleep? So there's this uncoupling of emotion, but most of all what's happening in REM sleep is that we're forming a relationship with particular rules or algorithms. We're starting to figure out based on all the experience that we had during the day, whether or not it's important that we avoid certain people or that we approach certain people, whether or not it's important that, you know, when we enter a building that we go into the elevator and turn left where the bathroom is, for instance. These general themes of things and locations and how they fit together and that has a word it's called meaning. During our day we're experiencing all sorts of things. Meaning is how we each individually piece together the relevance of one thing to the next, right? So if I suddenly told you that, you know, this pen was downloading all the information to my brain that was important to deliver this information, you'd probably think I was a pretty strange character. Because typically we don't think of pens as downloading information into brains. But if I told you that I was getting information from my computer that was allowing me to say things to you, you'd say, "Well, that's perfectly reasonable." And that's because we have a clear and agreed upon association with computers and information and memory, and we don't have that same association with pens. You might say, "Well, duh." But something in our brain needs to solidify those relationships and make sure that the certain relationships don't exist. And it appears that REM sleep is important for that, because when you deprive yourself or people of REM they start seeing odd associations, they tend to lump or batch things. I know this from my own experience of I've ever been sleep deprived, which unfortunately happens too often because I'm terrible with deadlines, pull an all-nighter, the word the starts to look like it's spelled incorrectly. And the is a very simple word to spell, but things start to look a little distorted. And we know that if people are deprived of REM sleep for very long periods of time, they start hallucinating. They literally start seeing relationships and movement of objects that isn't happening. And so REM sleep is really where we establish the emotional load, but where we also, start discarding of all the meanings that are irrelevant. And if you think about emotionality, a lot of over emotionality or catastrophizing is about seeing problems everywhere. And you could imagine why that might occur if you start linking the web of your experience too extensively. It's very important in order to have healthy, emotional, and cognitive functioning that we have fairly narrow channels between individual things. If we see something on the news that's very troubling, well, then it makes sense to be very troubled. But if we're troubled by everything and we start just saying, you know, "Everything is bothering me and I'm feeling highly irritable and everything is just distorting and troubling me." Chances are we are not actively removing the meaning, the connectivity between life experiences as well as we could and that almost always maps back to a deficit in REM sleep. So REM sleep is powerful and has this amazing capacity to eliminate the meanings that don't matter. It's not that it exacerbates the meanings that do matter, but it eliminates the meanings that don't matter. And that bears a striking resemblance to what happens early in development. This isn't a discussion about early in development, but early in development the reason a baby can't generate coordinated movements, and the reason why children can get very emotional about what seems like trivial events, or what adults know to be trivial events. Like, "Oh, the ice cream shop is closed." And then the kid just dissolves into, you know, a puddle of tears and the parents say, "Okay, well, it'll be open again in another time." The children one of the reasons that they can't generate coordinated movement, or place that of the ice cream shop being closed into a larger context, is because they have too much connectivity. And much of the maturation of the brain and nervous system that brings us to the point of being emotionally stable, reasonable, rational human beings is about elimination of connections between things. So REM sleep seems to be where we uncouple the potential for emotionality between various experiences. And that brings us to the absolutely fundamental relationship and similarity of REM sleep to some of the clinical practices that have been designed to eliminate emotionality and help people move through trauma and other troubling experiences, whether or not those troubling experiences are a death in the family of a close loved one, something terrible that happened to you or somebody else, or, you know, an entire childhood or some event that in your mind and body is felt as and experienced as, bad, terrible, or concerning. Many of you perhaps have heard of trauma treatment such as EMDR, eye movement desensitization reprocessing, or ketamine treatment for trauma. Something that recently became legal and is in fairly widespread clinical use. Interestingly enough, EMDR and ketamine at kind of a core level, bear very similar features to REM sleep. So let's talk about EMDR first. EMDR, eye movement desensitization reprocessing is something that was developed by a psychologist, Francine Shapiro. She actually was in Palo Alto. And the story goes that she was walking, not so incidentally, in the trees and forest behind Stanford, and she was recalling a troubling event in her own mind. So this would be from her own life. And she realized that as she was walking, the emotional load of that experience was not as intense or severe. She extrapolated from that experience of walking and not feeling as stressed about the stressful event to a practice that she put into work in with her clients, with her patients, and that now has become fairly widespread. It's actually one of the few behavior treatments that are approved by the American Psychological Association for the treatment of trauma. what she had her clients and patients do was move their eyes from side to side while recounting some traumatic or troubling event. Now this was of course in the clinic. And I'm guessing that she removed the walking component and just took the eye movement component to the clinic because while it would be nice to go on therapy sessions with your therapist and take walks there are certain boundaries to that such as, confidentiality. You know, if there are a lot of people around a person might not feel as open to discussing things, or weather barriers and things like that, you know, if it's raining or hailing outside, it gets tough to do. Why eye movements? Well, she never really said why eye movements. But, soon I'll tell you why the decision to select these lateralized eye movements for the work in the clinic was the right one. So these eye movements, they look silly. I'll do them because that's why I'm here. They look silly, but they basically involve sitting in a chair and moving one's eyes from side to side, not while talking. But, you know, for it's... And then recounting the events. So it's sometimes talking while moving the eyes, but usually it was moving the eyes from side to side for 30, 60 seconds, then describing this challenging procedure. Now as a vision scientist who also works on stress when I first heard this, I thought it was crazy, frankly. People would ask me about EMDR and I just thought, "That's crazy." I went and looked up some of the theories about why EMDR might work and there were a bunch of theories. "Oh, it mimics the eye movements during REM sleep." That was one. It turns out that's not true and I'll explain why. The other one was, "Oh, it synchronizes the activity on the two sides of the brain." Well, sort of, I mean, when you look into both sides of the binocular visual field you activate the visual cortex. But, this whole idea of synchrony between the two sides of the brain is something that I think modern neuroscience is starting to, let's just say, gently or not so gently move away from. This whole right brain, left brain business. It turns out however, that eye movements are the sort that I just did and that Francine Shapiro took from this walk experience and brought to her clients in the clinic, are the sorts of eye movements that you generate whenever you're moving through space, when you are self-generating that movement. So not so much when you're driving a car, but certainly if you were riding a bicycle, or you were walking or you were running, you don't realize it but you have these reflexive subconscious eye movements that go from side to side, and they are associated with the motor system. So when you move forward your eyes go like this. There've been a number of studies showing that these lateralized eye movements helped people move through or dissociate the emotional experience of particular traumas with those experiences, such that they could recall those experiences after the treatment and not feel stressed about them, or they didn't report them as traumatic any longer. Now the success rate wasn't 100%, but they were statistically significant in a number of studies. And yet there are still some critics of EMDR. And frankly, for a long time I still thought, "Well, I don't know. This just seems like kind of a hack." It just seems like kind of something that for which we don't know the mechanism, and we can't explain, But in the last five years, there have been no fewer than five and there's a sixth on the way, high quality peer reviewed manuscripts published in Journal of Neuroscience, Neuron, Cell Press Journal, Excellent Journal, Nature Excellent Journal. These are very stringent journals and papers showing that lateralized eye movements of the sort that I just did, and if you're just listening to this it's just moving the eyes from side to side with eyes open. That those eye movements but not vertical eye movements suppress the activity of the amygdala, which is this brain region that is involved in threat detection, stress, anxiety, and fear. There are some forms of fear that are not amygdala dependent, but the amygdala it's not a fear center, but it is critical for the fear response and for the experience of anxiety. So that's interesting. We've got a clinical tool now that indeed shows a lot of success in a good number of people, where eye movements from side to side are suppressing the amygdala. And the general theme is to use those eye movements to suppress the fear response, and then to recount or repeat the experience and over time uncouple the heavy emotional load, the sadness, the depression, the anxiety, the fear from whatever it was that happened that was traumatic. This is important to understand because, you know, I'd love to be able to tell somebody who had a traumatic experience that they would forget that experience, but the truth is you never forget the traumatic experience. What you do is you remove the emotional load. Eventually it really does lose its potency. The emotional potency is alleviated. Now EMDR I should just mention, tends to be most successful for single event or very specific kinds of trauma that happened over and over, as opposed to say an entire childhood or an entire divorce. It tends to be most effective for single event kinds of things, car crashes, et cetera, where people can really recall the events in quite a lot of detail. So it's not for everybody and it should be done... If it's going to be done for trauma it should be done in a clinical setting with somebody who's certified to do this. But that bears a lot of resemblance to REM sleep, right? This experience in our sleep where our eyes are moving, excuse me, although in a different way, but we don't have the chemical epinephrine in order to generate the fear response, and yet we're remembering the event from the previous day or days. Sometimes in REM sleep we think about things happened a long time ago. So that's interesting. And then now there's this new treatment, this chemical treatment with the drug ketamine, which also bears a lot of resemblance to the sorts of things that happen in REM sleep. Ketamine is getting a lot of attention now. And I think a lot of people just don't realize what ketamine is. Ketamine is a dissociative anesthetic. It is remarkably similar to the drug called PCP, which is certainly a hazardous drug for people to use. Ketamine and PCP both function to disrupt the activity of a particular receptor in the brain called the NMDA receptor, N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor. This is a receptor that's in the surface of neurons or on the surface of neurons for which most of the time it's not active, but when something very extreme happens and there's a lot of activity in the neural pathway that impinges on that receptor, it opens and it allows the entry of molecules, ions that trigger a cellular process that we call long-term potentiation. And long-term potentiation translates to a change in connectivity so that later you don't need that intense event for the neuron to become active again. Let me clarify a little bit of this. The NMDA receptor is gated by intense experience. One way you could think about this is, typically I walk in my home, I might make some food and sit down at my kitchen table, and I don't think anything about explosions. But were I to come home one night, sit down to a bowl of chicken soup and there was a massive explosion the neurons are associated with chicken soup in my kitchen table would be active in a way that was different than they were previously, and will be coupled to this experience of explosions such that the next time, and perhaps every other time that I go to sit down at the kitchen table, no matter how rational I am about the origins of that explosion, maybe it was a gas truck that was down the road and there's no reason to think it's there today, but I would have the same experience. Those neurons will become active and I'd get an increase in heart rate. I'd get an increase in sweating, et cetera. Ketamine blocks this NMDA receptor and prevents that crossover and the addition of meaning to the kitchen table, kitchen soup, excuse me, chicken soup explosion experience. So how is ketamine being used? Ketamine is being used to prevent learning of emotions very soon after trauma. So ketamine is being stocked in a number of different emergency rooms, where if people are brought in quickly and, you know, these are hard to describe even but, you know, a horrible experience of somebody seeing a loved one next to them killed in a car accident and they were driving that car. This isn't for everybody, certainly and you need to talk to your physician, but ketamine is being used so they might infuse somebody with ketamine so that their emotion it can still occur, but that the plasticity, the change in the wiring of their brain won't allow that intense emotion to be attached to the experience. Now immediately you can imagine the sort of ethical implications of this, right? Because certain emotions need to be coupled to experiences. I'm not saying that people should be using ketamine, or shouldn't be using ketamine, certainly not recreationally it's quite dangerous. It can be lethal and like PCP it can cause pretty dramatic changes in perception and behavior. But in the clinical setting the basis of ketamine assisted therapies is really to remove emotion. And I think the way I've been hearing about it talked about in the general public is a lot of people think it's a little bit more like the kind of psilocybin trials or the NMDA trials, where it's about becoming more emotional or getting in touch with a certain experience. Ketamine is about becoming dissociative or removed from the emotional component of experience. So now we have ketamine, which chemically blocks plasticity and prevents the connection between an emotion and an experience. That's a pharmacologic intervention. We have EMDR, which is this eye movement thing that is designed to suppress the amygdala, and it's designed to remove emotionality while somebody recounts an experience. And we have REM sleep, where the chemical epinephrin that allows for signaling of intense emotion and the experience of a tense emotion in the brain and body is not allowed. So we're starting to see a organizational logic, which is that a certain component of our sleeping life is acting like therapy. And that's really what REM sleep is about. So we should really think about REM sleep and slow wave sleep as both critical. Slow wave sleep for motor learning and detailed learning. REM sleep for attaching of emotions to particular experiences. And then for making sure that the emotions are not attached to the wrong experiences and for unlearning emotional responses if they're too intense or severe. And this all speaks to the great importance of mastering one sleep, something that we talked about in episode two of the podcast. And making sure that if life has disruptive events, either due to travel or stress, or changes in school hours or food schedule, something that we talked about in episodes three and four, that one can still grab a hold and manage one sleep life. Because fundamentally the unlearning of emotions that are troubling to us is what allows us to move forward in life. And indeed the REM deprivation studies show that people become hyperemotional. They start to catastrophize. And it's no surprise therefore, that sleep disturbances correlate with so many emotional and psychological disturbances. By now it should just be obvious why that will be the case. In fact, the other day I was in a discussion with a colleague of mine who's down in Australia, Dr. Sarah McKay. I've known her for two decades now from the time she was at Oxford. And Sarah studies among other things menopause in the brain. And she was saying that a lot of the emotional effects of menopause, actually are not directly related to the hormones. There've been some really nice studies showing that the disruptions in temperature regulation in menopause mapped to changes in sleep regulation that then impact emotionality and an inability to correctly adjust the circuits related to emotionality. And I encourage you to look at her work. We'll probably have her as a guest on the podcast at some point in the future, 'cause she's so knowledgeable about those sorts of issues, as well as issues related to testosterone and in people with all sorts of different chromosomal backgrounds. So sleep deprivation isn't just deprivation of energy. It's not just deprivation of immune function. It is deprivation of self-induced therapy every time we go to sleep. Okay. So things like EMDR and ketamine therapies are in-clinic therapies, but REM sleep is the one that you're giving yourself every night when you go to sleep. Which raises, I think, the other important question which is, how to get and how to know if you're getting the appropriate amount of REM sleep and slow wave sleep. So that's what we'll talk about next. So how should one go about getting the appropriate amount of slow-wave sleep and REM sleep and knowing that you're getting the right amount. Well, short of hooking yourself up to an EEG, it's gonna be tough to get exact measurements of brain states from night to night. Some people nowadays are using things like, the Oura Ring or a WHOOP band, or some other device to measure the quality and depth and duration of their sleep. And for many people those devices can be quite useful. Some people are only gauging their sleep by way of whether or not they feel rested, whether or not they feel like they're learning and they're getting better or not. There are some things that one can really do. And the first one might surprise you in light of everything I've said, and probably everything you've heard about sleep. There was a study done by a Harvard undergraduate, Emily Hoagland, who was in Robert Stickgold's lab at the time. And that's the study explored how variations in total sleep time related to learning, as compared to total sleep time itself. And to summarize the study, what they found was that it was more important to have a regular amount of sleep each night as opposed to the total duration. In other words, and what they showed was that improvements in learning or deficits in learning were more related to whether or not you got six hours, six hours, five hours, six hours, that was better than if somebody got for instance, six hours, 10 hours, seven hours, four or five hours. See you might say, "Well, that's crazy because I thought we were just all supposed to get more sleep and there's more REM towards morning." It turns out that forsake of learning new information and performance on exams in particular, that's what was measured, limiting the variation in the amount of your sleep is at least as important and perhaps more important than just getting more sleep overall. And I think this will bring people great relief, many people great relief who are struggling to "get enough sleep." Remember, a few episodes ago I talked about the difference between fatigue and insomnia. You know, fatigue tends to be when we are tired. Insomnia tends to lead to a sleepiness during the day when we're falling asleep. And you don't want that, you don't want either of those things really. But, I found it striking that the data from this study really point to the fact that consistently getting about the same amount of sleep is better than just getting more sleep. And I think nowadays so many people are just aiming for more sleep, and they're rather troubled about the fact that they're only getting five hours, or they're only getting six hours in some cases. It may be the case that they are sleep deprived and they need more sleep, but some people just have a lower sleep need. And I find great relief, personally, in the fact that consistently getting, for me, about six hours or six and a half hours is going to be more beneficial than constantly striving for eight or nine and finding that some nights I'm getting five and sometimes I'm getting nine and varying around the mean. As I recall, and I think I'm gonna get this precisely right, but if not I know that I'm at least close. For every hour variation in sleep regardless of whether or not it was more sleep than one typically got, there was a 17% reduction in performance on this particular exam type. So this is powerful. This means that we should strive for a regular amount of sleep. And for some of us that means falling asleep and waking up and going back to sleep. For some people means falling asleep and waking up and not getting back to sleep. Now ideally, you're getting the full compliment of slow wave sleep early at night and sleep toward morning, which is REM sleep. Which brings us to, how to get more REM sleep. Well, there are a couple of different ways but here's how to not get more REM sleep. All right. First of all, drink a lot of fluid right before going to sleep. One of the reasons why we wake up in the middle of the night to use the bathroom is because when our bladder is full there is a neural connection, literally a set of neurons and a nerve circuit that goes to the brain stem that wakes us up. Actually some people that I know and won't be mentioned, actually use this to try and adjust for their jet lag when they're trying to stay awake. Having to urinate is one of the most anxiety evoking experiences anyone can have. If you really have to go to the bathroom it's very hard to fall asleep or stay asleep. And bedwetting, which happens in kids very early on is a failure of those circuits to mature until, you know, I think we all assume that babies are gonna pee in their sleep, but adults aren't supposed to do that. And the circuits take some time to develop and in some kids they develop a little bit later than others. So having a full bladder is one way to disrupt your sleep. You don't wanna go to bed dehydrated, but that's one way. On the other hand there is evidence that if you want to remember your dreams more, or remember more of your dreams there is a tool that you can use. I don't necessarily recommend it, which is to drink a bunch of water before you go to sleep. And then what happens is you tend to break in and out of REM sleep. It tends to be fractured. And with a sleep journal and they've done these laboratory studies. Believe it or not, people will recall more of their dreams because they're in this kind of semi-conscious state because they're constantly waking up throughout the night. I suggest not having a full bladder before you go to sleep. That one's kind of an obvious one, but nonetheless. The other one is if you recall that during REM sleep we have a shift in neurotransmitter such that we have less serotonin, right? Just wanna make sure I got that right. Excuse me, less serotonin. There are a lot of supplements out there geared toward improving sleep. I've taken some of them and I've taken many of them, if not all of them at this point. So I could report back to you. And I think I mentioned on a previous episode that when I take tryptophan, or anything that contains 5-HTP, which is serotonin or a precursor to serotonin, serotonin is made from tryptophan, I tend to fall very deeply asleep and then wake up a few hours later. And that makes sense now based on the fact that, you just don't want a lot of REM sleep early on. What was probably happening is that I was getting a lot of REM sleep early on, because low levels of serotonin are typically associated with slow wave sleep and that comes early in the night. So for some people those supplements might work, but be aware serotonin supplements could disrupt the timing of REM sleep and slow wave sleep. And in my case led to waking up very shortly after going to sleep and not being able to get back to sleep. Now if you want to increase your slow wave sleep. That's interesting. There are ways to do that. One of the most powerful ways to increase slow wave sleep, the percentage of slow wave sleep, apparently without any disruption to the other components of sleep and learning is to engage in resistance exercise. It's pretty clear that resistance exercise triggers a number of metabolic and endocrine pathways that lend themselves to release of growth hormone, which happens early in the night. And resistance exercise therefore can induce a greater percentage of slow wave sleep. It doesn't have to be done very close to going to bed time. In fact, for some people the exercise could be disruptive, for reasons I've talked about in previous episodes. But resistance exercise, unlike aerobic exercise does seem to increase the amount of slow wave sleep, which as we know is involved in motor learning and the acquisition of fine detailed information not general rules, or the emotional components of experiences. For those of you that are interested in lucid dreaming and would like to increase the amount of lucid dreaming that you're experiencing, I haven't been able to track down that device with the red light that I described at the beginning, but there are a number of just simple zero technology tools that one could use in principle. One is to set a queue. The way this works is you come up with a simple statement about something that you'd like to see, or experience later in dreams. You can, for instance, write down, you know, something like, I want to remember the red apple. I know it sounds silly and trivial, and you look at that you would probably wanna write it down on a piece of paper. You might even want to draw a red apple, and then before you go to sleep you would look at it and then you would just go to sleep. There are some reports that doing that for several days in a row can lead to a situation in which you are suddenly in your dream and you remember the red apple, and that gives you a sort of tether to reality between the dream state and reality that allows you to navigate and shape and kind of adjust your dreams. Lucid dreaming does not have to be, or include the ability to alter features of the dream, you know, to be able to control things in the dream. Sometimes it's just the awareness that you are dreaming, but nonetheless some people enjoy lucid dreaming. And then for people that have a lot of lucid dreams that feel kind of overwhelmed by those, that's going to involve trying to embrace protocols that can set the right duration of sleep. There's a little bit of literature not a lot that shows that keeping the total amount of sleep per night to say six hours such that you begin sleep and end at the beginning and end of one of these ultradian cycles, can be better than waking up in the middle of one of these ultradian cycles. So try and find the right amount of sleep that you need, that's right for you, and then try and get that consistently night to night. If you're a lucid dreamer and you don't like it, then you may want to start to make sure that you're waking up at the end of one of these ultradian cycles. So in this case, it would be better to wake up after six hours than after seven and if you did sleep longer than six hours, maybe you'd wanna get to seven and a half hours. 'Cause that's gonna reflect the end of one of these 90 minute cycles, as opposed to waking up in the middle. Alcohol. Alcohol and marijuana are well known to induce states that are pseudo sleep like. Especially, when people fall asleep after having consumed alcohol or THC, one of the active components of marijuana. Alcohol, THC and most things like them, meaning things that increase serotonin, or GABA are going to disrupt the pattern of sleep. They're going to disrupt the depth. They're going to disrupt the overall sequencing of more slow wave sleep early in the night and more REM sleep later in the night. That's just the reality. There are some things that at least, in a few studies that I could find seem to suggest that you could increase the amount of slow wave sleep using things like arginine, the amino acid arginine. Although, you really wanna check. Arginine can have effects on heart, et cetera has other effects. But, alcohol, THC, not gonna be great for sleep and depth of sleep. You might feel like you can fall asleep faster, but the sleep that you're accessing really isn't the kind of deep restorative sleep that you should be getting. Now, of course, if that's what you need in order to sleep and that's within your protocols, I've said here before, I'm not suggesting people take anything. I'm not a medical doctor. I'm not a cop. So I'm not trying to irregulate anyone's behavior. I'm just telling you what the literature says. Some of you may want to explore your dreams and meaning of dreams, et cetera. You know, there's not a lot of hard data about how to do this, but a lot of people report keeping a sleep journal, where a dream journal can be very useful. So they mark when they think they fell asleep the night before, when they woke up and if they wake up in the middle of the night, early in the morning they'll just write down what they can recall of their dreams. And even if they recall nothing, many people have the experience of mid morning or later afternoon that suddenly comes to them that they had a dream about something and writing that down. I kept a dream journal for a while. It didn't really afford me much. I didn't really learn anything except that my dreams were very bizarre. But, there are some things that happen in dreams that are associated with REM sleep as compared to slow wave sleep, which can tell you whether or not your dream likely happened in REM sleep or slow wave sleep. And the distinguishing feature it turns out is something called theory of mind. Theory of mind is actually an idea that was developed for the study and assessment of autism. And it was initially that phrase, theory of mind, was brought about by Simon Baron Cohen, who is Sacha Baron Cohen, the comedians brother. Simon Baron Cohen is a psychologist and to some extent an neuroscientist at Oxford. And theory of mind tests are done on children. And the theory of mind test is some what like the following, a child is brought into a laboratory and watches a video of a child playing with some sort of toy. And then at the end of playing with that toy they put the toy in a drawer and they go away, and then another child comes in and is looking around and then the experimenter asks the child who's in the experiment, the real child and says, "You know, what does the child think? You know, what are they feeling?" And most children have a particular age, five or six or older will say, "Oh, you know, he or she is confused, they don't know where the toy is." Or, they'll say something that implies what we call theory of mind, that they can put their ideas and their mind into what the other child is likely to be feeling or experiencing. That's theory of mind. And it turns out that this is used as one of the assessments for autism, because some children, not all, but some children that have autism or that go on to develop autism don't have this theory of mind. They tend to fixate on the fact that the first child put the toy in the drawer. They'll say it's in the drawer as opposed to answering the question which is how does the second child feel about it, or what are they experiencing? So theory of mind is something that emerges early in life as a part of the maturation of the circuits in the brain associated with emotional learning and social interactions. And we experienced this in certain dreams. So if you had a dream that you're puzzled about, or that you're fixated on and you're thinking about, you might ask, "In that dream was I assessing somebody else's emotion and feeling, or was I very much in my own first person experience?" And that the tendency is that theory of mind tends to show up most in these REM associated dreams. Now this isn't a hard and fast rule, but chances are if you were in a dream and you were thinking about other people who wanted to do something to you, you were thinking about their desire to chase you or help you, or something that was related to someone else's emotional experience. It was probably a REM dream. That dream occurred in rapid eye movement sleep as opposed to slow wave sleep. And that makes sense when you think about the role of REM in emotional unlearning of associations with particular life events. That REM is rich with all sorts of exploration of the emotional load of being chased, or the emotional load of having to take an exam the next day, or being late for something. But again, if you're fixated or you can recall thinking a lot about, or feeling a lot about what somebody else's motivations were then chances are it was in REM and if not chances are it was in slow wave sleep. Today we've been in a deep dive of sleep and dreaming, learning and unlearning. And I just want to recap a few of the highlights and important points. A lot more slow wave sleep and less REM early in the night, more REM and less slow wave sleep later in the night. REM sleep is associated with intense experiences without this chemical epinephrine that allows us the anxiety or fear. And almost certainly has an important role in uncoupling of emotion from experiences. Kind of self-induced therapy that we go into each night. That bears striking resemblance to things like EMDR and ketamine therapies and so forth. Slow wave sleep is critical, however, it's critical mostly for motor learning and the learning of specific details. So REM is kind of emotions and general themes and meaning, and slow wave sleep, motor learning and details. I personally find it fascinating that consistency of sleep, meaning getting six hours every night is better than getting ten one night, eight the next, five the next, four the next. I find that fascinating and I think I also like it because it's something I can control better than just trying to sleep more, which I think I'm not alone and agreeing that that's just hard for a lot of people to do. This episode also brings us to the conclusion of a five episode streak where we've been focusing on sleep and transitions in and out of sleep, non sleep depressed. We've talked about a lot of tools, morning light, evening light, avoiding lights, blue blockers, supplements, tools for measuring sleep duration and quality. We've been covering a lot of themes. I like to think that by now you're armed with a number of tools and information. Things like knowing when your temperature minimum is, knowing when you might wanna view light or not, when you might wanna eat or take hot showers, or God forbid a cold shower, something that most people including me more or less loath, but can have certain benefits. And that will allow you to shape your sleep life and get this consistent, or more or less consistent amount of sleep on a regular basis. Nobody's perfect. In fact I have this little joke that I sometimes tell, it's not funny. Like, most of the jokes I tell I'm told are not funny, but, you know, there's so much excitement now about intermittent fasting. Sometimes I think that someone should start something on intermittent sleep deprivation, although we're already doing that. We are all experiencing lack of sleep from time to time. And I don't think we should catastrophize that too much. I think that what we wanna do rather than accumulate a sleep anxiety is to... You know, if we get a bad night's sleep, we want to adjust, we want to get back on track and just get the consistent amount of sleep. Use those non sleep deep rest protocols to help us relax when we're feeling anxious, we're having trouble waking up in the middle of the night. There are a lot of tools out there, and most of them are zero cost. And so I hope you'll find those beneficial. If you've been hearing Costello snoring throughout this episode. I apologize in his behalf. As I said, in the welcome video to this podcast he's an integral part of the podcast. A few people have said, "Hey, that noise in the background is really disruptive." Hey, what can I say? Costello is a ten-year-old bulldog mastiff. The lifespan on those animals is about 10 years. So I'm not trying to make you feel guilty, but, you know, after he's gone there won't be any snoring, although I'll probably get a different dog. So sort of a, what were the kids say, sorry not sorry. Sorry not sorry about the snoring and I'm sorry if it's disruptive genuinely, but he's here for the hall. So that's what that's about. As we close out the segment on sleep we are moving into a new theme and topic for the next four to five episodes. We are going to discuss the science and the tools related to neuroplasticity. Neuroplasticity is a remarkable feature of the nervous system. In fact, it's the defining feature of the nervous system, which is its ability to change itself in response to experience. That is unlike every other tissue and collection of cells and organ in our body. It's really what makes us us as a species and it's what makes us us as individuals, and it's really where our potential lies. Everything that we know, everything we can do, and our true potential in terms of what we will ever be able to know, do, say, in life is set by the limits of neuroplasticity. So we're going to explore learning and childhood, learning and adulthood. We're going to discuss detailed protocols as they relate to sensory plasticity. Learning new sensory information, versus motor plasticity or sensory motor integration. We're going to talk about language acquisition. We're going to be talking about emotional acquisition and breadth. As well as, I think a topic a lot of people are gonna find fascinating is, the relationship between plasticity set during childhood attachment to parent or other caregiver, and how that maps onto adult relationships. Many of you have probably heard about secure attach or insecure attach. The A, B and C, D babies as they're called from the classic studies of Bowlby and others. But now there's actual neuroscience that can say which circuits were active during those early life attachment and how those map to adult attachment styles, challenges, and what makes us more likely to select certain partners and styles of attachment, as well as how to change those. It's really fascinating and I think neuroscience's time has come for neuroplasticity. We're also gonna talk, of course, about supplements and chemicals and machines and devices that can assist in speeding up the plasticity process. Or believe it or not, there are some cases where you might want to delay plasticity in order to get more depth of learning and have that learning last longer. Something that is just absolutely spectacular literature. So I'm very excited to move on to that topic soon. I hope that the tools that you've acquired so far and the knowledge that you've acquired so far is helping you with your self evaluation and experimentation as you see fit, and is allowing you to not just sleep better, but feel better while you're awake. And hopefully has set the stage for you to learn better as we start to march into the month on neuroplasticity. Many of you have asked how you can help support the Huberman Lab Podcast and we greatly appreciate the question. You can help support the podcast by subscribing to the YouTube channel, if you haven't already and leaving comments and questions in the comment section. If you could subscribe on Apple and or Spotify, that's helpful. And there's a place on Apple Podcasts to leave a rating, as well as comments about how you feel about the podcast. If you could suggest the podcast to friends and coworkers and anyone else that you think would benefit from the information that also really helps us get the word out. And of course, check out our sponsors because that's a very direct way to help us continue to get this information out to the general public. Many of you have asked about supplements and where I personally get my supplements. I've partnered with Thorne and I get my supplements from Thorne because, by my view they have the highest level of stringency and precision in terms of what's in the bottle. And they also have very high quality standards. They're partnered with the Mayo Clinic and all the major sports organizations. If you wanna try Thorne supplements you can go to thorne.com. So that's Thorne spelled thorne.com/u/huberman. And if you do that you can see the formulations that I take. And you'll also get 20% off, not just those formulations, but anything that Thorne makes. That's thorne.com/u/huberman to get 20% off anything that they provide. Last but not least, a few people wrote to me with some questions/corrections about things that I said in previous podcasts. So in keeping with my goal of making the information accurate and clear, I just want to correct myself about a few things that I said. One of those and I'm guessing it probably came from an endocrinologist or somebody else that knows a lot about testicles said, "Huberman, you mentioned that testosterone is made by the sertoli cells of the testes, and it's not. It's made by the leydig cells of the testes." And indeed you are correct. And so I want to make sure that I clarify that. Testosterone is made by the leydig cells of the testes, not by the sertoli cells. The sertoli cells make 5 alpha-reductase and aromatase, and some other enzymes involved in conversion of testosterone into things like DHT and estrogen. So thank you for that correction. I genuinely appreciate it. I misspoke. The other thing I said, was at one point I said, "Typical temperature is 96.8 when I actually meant to say 98.6." So it was a dyslexic slip on my part and I apologize. I don't know that I'm dyslexic. I know I haven't been clinically diagnosed with dyslexia, but I swapped them, which sometimes happens when I'm going fast. So I apologize. I'll use this a moment to just say temperature varies a lot across the day and night, that was a theme of previous podcasts. So we can't really talk about average temperature anyway, but I do want to be clear that most people think about average temperature as 98.6. I misspoke, my error and I apologize. Thank you for joining me in this journey of the nervous system in biology and trying to understand the mechanisms that make us who we are and how we function in sleep and in wakefulness. It's really an incredible landscape to consider and I hope that you're getting a lot out of the information. As always thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

========================================

--- Video 345 ---
Video ID: NAATB55oxeQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NAATB55oxeQ
Title: How to Defeat Jet Lag, Shift Work & Sleeplessness
Published: 2021-01-25 13:00:18 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I discuss a simple and reliable measurement called your "temperature minimum" that you can use to rapidly adjust to new time zones when traveling and to offset the bad effects of nocturnal shift work. I also discuss tools for adjusting sleep and waking rhythms in babies, teens, new parents and the elderly.

For an updated list of our current sponsors, please visit our website as previous sponsors mentioned in this podcast episode may no longer be affiliated with us: https://www.hubermanlab.com/sponsors

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Timestamps below.
00:00 - Introduction
04:15 - The bedrock of sleep-rest cycles 
07:05 - Night owls and morning larks 
08:22 - “The perfect schedule” 
11:04 - The 100K Lux per morning goal 
15:15 - Keeping your biological clock set 
16:15 - Reset your cortisol  
21:22 - Jet Lag, death and lifespan 
23:00 - Going East versus West 
28:45 - The key to clock control  
31:01 - Your Temperature Minimum 
36:30 - Temperature and Exercise 
41:20 - Eating 
42:50 - Go West 
44:15 - Pineal myths and realities 
51:13 - The Heat-Cold Paradox 
53:45 - Staying on track 
55:30 - Nightshades  
57:00 - Emergency resets 
57:30 - Psychosis by light 
58:05 - Shift work       
1:02:40 - The Temperature-Light Rule 
1:04:20 - Up all night: watch the sunrise? 
1:06:45 - Error correction is good 
1:08:20 - NSDR protocols/implementation
1:10:44 - The frog skin in your eye (not a joke) 
1:16:39 - Why stress turns your hair white 
1:17:24 - Ovaries or testes? 
1:18:25 - Babies and bright light 
1:21:40 - Polyphasic sleep         
1:25:25 - Ultradian cycles in children  
1:27:38 - Teens and puberty 
1:29:50 - Light before waking for better sleep 
1:31:20 - Older people and cicadian rhythms 
1:33:48 - Sleepy Supplements 
1:42:00 - Red Pills & Acupuncture 
1:43:50 - Highlights  
1:48:30 - Feedback and Support 

#HubermanLab #Jetlag #Sleep

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (United States)
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast where we discuss science, and science-based tools for everyday life. [bright music] - I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology, at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire to bring you zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. Along those lines, I want to thank today's sponsors of the podcast. The first sponsor is Athletic Greens. Athletic Greens is a product that I've been using since 2012, long before I launched this podcast. So I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin, mineral probiotic supplement. It's a greens drink that you mix with water, I add lemon juice to mine because I like the way it tastes and it gets you all the vitamins and minerals you need as well as probiotics, and probiotics are important to me because there are a lot of data now showing that gut health is important for the gut brain access, things like mood, immunity, etc. If you want to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman and if you do that, they'll send you a year supply of liquid vitamin D3 and K2. Vitamin D3, as many of you probably already know, it has been shown to be important for various aspects of immune system function, as well as other biological pathways, metabolic function, etc. So once again, if you want to try Athletic Greens, you go to athleticgreens.com/huberman and they will send you a year supply of the D3 K2. This podcast is also brought to us by Headspace. Headspace is a meditation app that makes meditation easy. I've been meditating on and off since I was in my teens with more off than on, mainly because meditation can be hard to stick to. Some people are very good at maintaining a meditation practice, others not so much, I'm in the latter category. However, I find that when I have something to guide my meditation such as Headspace, it makes it much easier for me to be consistent about my meditation practice. There is now tons of data out there in quality peer review journals, showing that meditative states can facilitate cognition, recovery of mental function, recovery of physical ability, etc. So there are a lot of reasons to take up a meditation practice. Headspace and the Headspace app makes it easy to learn and maintain a meditation practice. If you want to try Headspace, you can go to headspace.com/specialoffer. And if you do that, they will let you try Headspace for an entire month for free. So zero risk there, that's headspace.com/specialoffer to try Headspace, the meditation app, for one month for free. Today's podcast episode is about sleep and wakefulness. We are going to discuss jet lag, shift work, babies, kids and the elderly, and we are going to discuss protocols that are backed by science. That means quality peer reviewed papers published in excellent journals that can support particular tools that you can use to combat things like jet lag, offset some of the negative effects of shift work and make life easier for the new parent as well as for the newborn child, the adolescent, anyone that wants to sleep better, feel better when they're awake, etc. If you've listened to the previous three episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we've been exploring these themes of wakefulness and sleepiness, how to fall asleep, how to stay asleep. And we've been discussing parameters like light, exercise, temperature, etc. If you've had a chance to listen to those episodes, great. Today's discussion will be even more digestible for you. If you haven't, that's okay. I will provide a little bit of background here or there so that it's not necessary that you have listened to those previous episodes. But if you get a chance to listen to them, please do it, I think it will help you digest the information better. Let's just take a step back for a moment and remind everybody what we're talking about. We're talking about an endogenous, meaning within us, rhythm that we call the circadian rhythm. The circadian rhythm is a 24 hour rhythm in all sorts of functions. The most prominent one is a rhythm in our feelings of wakefulness and sleepiness. So believe it or not, the experiment has been done throughout history, not often, but it's been done where people would go down into a cave and will exist in constant darkness for some period of time. There are also cases where people have been in constant light for some period of time. But because people can close their eyes, it's actually easier to do the experiment where you're in constant darkness to address the question of what is the endogenous, meaning, the internal rhythm that we all have. And it turns out we all have this rhythm of about 24 hours, although it's not exactly 24 hours. Meaning, every 24 hours your body temperature goes from low to high and back down to low again. And it takes 24 hours for that to repeat. Not 18, not six, 24 plus or minus a couple hours. You also have a rhythm in sleepiness and wakefulness that correlates with that. We tend to be sleepy as our temperature is falling, getting lower, and we tend to be more awake or waking when our temperature is increasing. This is a biological fact. It is right down to our DNA. We actually have genes in every single one of our cells that ensure that every cell is on this 24 hour-ish rhythm, close to 24 hours. We have a clock over the roof of our mouth, a group of neurons called the suprachiasmatic nucleus. That clock generates a 24 hour rhythm. And that clock is in-trained, meaning it is matched, to the external light-dark cycle, which is no surprise, 24 hours. Spinning of the earth takes 24 hours. So, our cells, our organs, our wakefulness, our temperature, but also our metabolism, our immune system, our mood, all of that is tethered to the outside light-dark cycle. And if we are living our life in a perfect way, where we wake up in the morning, and we view sunlight as it crosses the horizon, and then by evening, we catch a little sunlight and then at night we're in complete darkness, we will be more or less perfectly matched to the external or ambient light-dark cycle. Very few of us do that because of these things that we call artificial lights, and this other thing that we call life demands. So today we're going to talk about when we get pulled away from that rhythm. Now you may immediately be thinking, well, I've heard there are night owls and there are mornings larks, they're sometimes called and their genetic polymorphisms, that's just a fancy name for genetic variations that make some people want to wake up early and other people want to stay up late and teens want to sleep in more. Sure, that's all true. That's all true regardless of what names we give those. However, there's no escaping the fact that human beings are a diurnal species. We were designed, literally, our cells and the circuits of our body were constructed to be awake during the daytime and asleep at night. How do I know that? Well, I wasn't consulted at the design phase, but I'm certain of that because many studies have shown that when we deviate too far from a diurnal schedule and we try and become nocturnal, we can pull it off, but serious health effects, both mental and physical, start to arise. I'm not going to spend much of today talking about all the negative effects of jet lag I'll talk a little bit about it, or the negative effects of shift work, or trying to scare you by telling you about the quite valid data around depression, amnesia, dementia, all the terrible things that happen when you're not sleeping well, rather I'd like to focus on what you can do and arm you with tools. So let's talk about that perfect schedule for a moment. And then let's talk about jet lag and what jet lag really represents and how to push back on jet lag, shift your clock faster, and escape some of the severe bad things that can happen with jet lag. Including just feeling miserable when you're traveling for work or vacation. So what is the perfect day? What does that look like from our circadian sleep-wakefulness standpoint? I'm about to summarize what I've said in the three previous podcast episodes, as well as now countless Instagram posts. Here's the deal. You basically want to get as much light, ideally sunlight, but as much light into your eyes during the period of each 24 hour cycle when you want to be awake, when you want to be alert. And you want to get as little light into your eyes at the times of that 24 hour cycle when you want to be asleep or drowsy and falling asleep. How much is enough? Well, you don't want to go so high with the light exposure that you damage your eyes because as many of you have heard me say before, the eyes are actually two pieces of your brain, your central nervous system that were extruded out of your skull. And as pieces of the central nervous system, aka your brain, they will not regenerate. At least right now, the technologies don't exist to regenerate those neurons in humans you do not want to damage them. So what is too bright? Well, when it's painful to look at. When you have to blink or close your eyes in order to bear it. So please don't look at very bright lights, so painful that they're likely going to damage your eyes. However, if you get up in the morning, and it's still dark out and you want to be awake, you would be wise to turn on artificial lights, in particular, overhead lights for reasons I've discussed previously. But those overhead lights will optimally trigger the neurons, these melanopsin cells in the retina that will activate your circadian clock. When the sun comes out, even if there's cloud cover, the sun does come out every day regardless of where you live, unless you live in a cave. People have said to me, well, I live in an area where I can't really see the sun. Well, the sun is there, it might be hiding behind clouds, unless it's very very dark where you live like Scandinavia in the depths of winter in which case you might want some artificial light. Get some sunlight in your eyes when you can. Here's the deal with sunlight and artificial light that I have not discussed previously. A lot of photon energy, a high amount of lux, L-U-X, comes through even cloud cover. A good number to shoot for as a rule of thumb, is to try and get exposure to at least 100,000 lux before 9:00 AM. 10:00 AM maybe, but before 9:00 AM assuming you're waking up sometime between five and 8:00 AM. Okay, so get 100,000 lux. Now you do not, I want to repeat, you do not want to stare at a 200,000 lux or a 100,000 lux light. It's very, very bright. The mechanism of circadian clock setting and this is very important, the mechanism of circadian clock setting involves these neurons in your eye that send electrical signals to this clock above the roof of your mouth and that system sums, meaning it adds photons, it's a very slow system. So let's say that I wake up and I look at my computer screen briefly or my phone screen. That's probably 500 to 1,000 lux. If I were to look at that for a full minute, I would get that photon energy transferred into electrical energy of neurons and it would be communicated to my circadian clock. However, the signal that it's morning will not have registered with the circadian clock unless I looked at that for a hundred minutes or more, so 100,000. Now the problem is if you wake up at eight o'clock, you're not going to get enough light from artificial light before you reach what's called the circadian dead zone. So you have this opportunity before 9:00 AM, maybe 10:00 AM to capture enough photons, and you have to do it with your eyes. I've discussed why that's important in previous episodes of the podcast, we have to do it with your eyes. There is no extra ocular photo reception. This is not about vitamin D in your skin. This is about setting your circadian clock which is paramount for mental and physical health. So here we're talking about trying to get that at least 100,000 photons but not all at once, but you got to get them before 9:00 AM-ish, maybe 10:00 AM. So what do you do? You go outside. If you want to get nerdy about this quantitative, you could download a free app like Light Meter and take a look around your house with Light Meter and you'll notice that even bright overhead lights are only emitting about 4,000 or 5,000 lux. It's going to take a long while of looking at those lights with eyes open in order to set your circadian clock and tell your brain and body that it's morning. Going outside even on a cloudy day could be 7,000, 10,000 lux. It's really remarkable how bright it is, meaning how much photon energy is coming through. So try and get 100,000 lux before that 9:00 AM. Now, if you can't do that because you live in an area of the world where it's just not bright enough. Some people have sent me pictures from Northern England. It's just not bright enough in winter. Then sure, you can resort to using artificial lights in order to get enough photons. And I'm putting out this 100,000 lux number as a target to get each day before 9:00 AM. You can in theory, get it all from artificial lights, but there are some special qualities about sunlight that make sunlight the better stimulus. First of all, it's free if it's available outside. There is a number of different... There are, excuse me, a number of different technologies kind of like this one like a light pad that this one says it's a 930 lux. I'm covering this up 'cause I'm not trying to promote any specific products. I actually bought this just with my own money on Amazon, they're not a sponsor. And it lets you toggle the brightness, I think by holding this on, holding down this button, you can make it dimmer or brighter. There's about 1,000 lux, it seems really bright, but a cloudy day outside will have five times more photon energy coming through. So some people set these lights or ring lights that they use for selfies and that kind of thing near their coffee or workstation first thing in the morning but you really want to get sunlight, okay? So those things are kind of nice because they'll travel and we're going to talk about jet lag. But I can't emphasize this enough that light has to be captured and summed before you enter the circadian dead zone which is the middle of the day. This is again, trying to achieve kind of perfect schedule. Then I've recommended, based on scientific literature, that you look at sunlight sometime around the time when the sun is setting and the reason for that of course is because it adjusts down the sensitivity of your eyes because here's the diabolical thing. While we need a lot of photon energy early in the day to wake up our system and set our circadian clock, and prepare us for a good night's sleep 14 to 16 hours later, it takes very little photon energy to reset and shift our clock after 8:00 PM. And that's why you want to, as much as you safely can, avoid bright light and even not so bright light between the hours of 10 or 11:00 PM and 4:00 AM. A number of people have asked me some questions about this. And the last episode I went into red lights, I went ahead and discussed blue blockers, all that kind of stuff, so I'm not going to repeat all that. But here's the thing, if you see afternoon light, you're going to adjust down the sensitivity of your eyes so that you have a little bit more wiggle room, a little bit more leeway to view lights from screens and overhead lights even late at night without disrupting your circadian clock. But it is a kind of a double-edged sword where you need a lot of light early in the day and you need to avoid bright lights later in the day. I've mentioned studies on here, a number of you have asked about getting the references. We are in the process of trying to get a webpage going with full links. There's some copyright issues that we have to deal with. But wherever possible, I'll try and reference these studies and when people ask I'll generally put them in the response to their comments on YouTube or Instagram. There have been two studies done from University of Colorado, both published in Current Biology. You can easily find these online by just googling the words, Current Biology, camping and reset circadian clocks, that have shown that two days of waking up with the sun and avoiding light at night, they actually took graduate students camping, what a cool experiment to be a part of, reset the melatonin and cortisol rhythms for these people that had otherwise drifted quite far from their natural rhythms. There're other things that you can do to shift your clock and to reinforce your clock. Like exercising more or less the same time, eating more or less the same time, etc. That's not what today's episode is about. So I just described perfect schedule. Get at least 100,000 lux of light exposure to the eyes not all at once, but summing across the morning. Again you know when it's too much because it's painful to look at, so that's obviously something to avoid. But then once the middle of the day, let's say, you're waking up at 10 or 11 you go outside the sun's overhead, forget it, you're not going to shift your clock, you're just not. It doesn't work that way. In the evening, you see the evening light and you want to get that light to adjust down your retinal sensitivity to afford you a bit of a buffer so that late at night, if you happen to look at screens or go to the bathroom in the middle of the night, it's not going to shift your clock because it takes probably only about 1,000 to 1500 lux of light energy to shift your clock in the middle of the night. So let's talk about shifting clocks because for the jet lagged person, this ability to shift the clock with light, temperature, exercise, and food is vitally important for getting onto the new local schedule. And there's so much out there about jet lag today. I'm going to dial it down to one very specific parameter that all of you can figure out without any technology or devices and can apply for when you travel for work or pleasure, or anytime you're jet lagged, and I want to absolutely emphasize that you don't have to travel to get jet lagged. Many of you are jet lagged. You're jet lagged because you're looking at your phone in the middle of the night, you're jet lagged 'cause you're waking up at different times a day, you're jet lagged because your exercise is on a kind of chaotic regime, some days at this time, some days at that time. And if that works for you, great. I want to be really clear that a number of people always say, well, I know so and so that you know only needed four hours of sleep and, or they're just fine, they traveled to Europe and they're just fine. There's a lot of individual variability. And we're going to talk about the origins of some of that variability. I mean, I know people that can eat anything and somehow seem to maintain great lipid profiles and you know, body weight and fitness ability. And I know some people that they eat one cracker and they sort of dissolve into a puddle of kind of tears, right, because they think that that's going to throw them off and maybe it does, I don't know. There's a tremendous amount of variability out there. So, this is really about optimal and what's possible. And you have to ask, I can just say from personal experience, I suffer terribly from jet lag, traveling in certain directions but not others. Some people don't have trouble with jet lag. Many people will travel to a new location, they feel great for the first day and night and then they crash and they have trouble sleeping. Or they travel back and they have a terrible time getting back onto a normal schedule. And some of this varies with age and some of it varies with genetics and there is no simple pill or anything that you can take to just get rid of jet lag. It doesn't work that way. If it worked that way, I would tell you. But there are some simple things that you can do. I'm going to arm you with the knowledge of what jet lag is and how it works. And contrary to what many people out there say and believe, I know that understanding mechanism affords you more flexibility. Why understand mechanism as just opposed to me just writing up a PDF and giving you a list of things to do? Well, what happens when you can't do those things in exactly the way they're written down. When you understand mechanism, you understand how to control the machine that is your biological system, your nervous system. So a little bit of understanding about mechanism goes a really long way. So that's where we're headed. Let's talk about what jet lag is. Okay well, I promised that I wouldn't get too dark with all the terrible things that can happen with jet lag, but I'm about to get dark. There are quality peer reviewed papers showing that jet lag will shorten your life. It will kill you earlier. I guess it means you'll die earlier. It doesn't actually kill you necessarily. Although there are many cases where tourists end up stepping in front of buses, especially in countries where the cars and buses drive on the opposite side of the street that they're used to, who are jet lagged and lose their life that way. Jet lag is a serious thing. Sure we have a family story about this. When I was growing up, I had a family member travel overseas for work and take a sleeping pill, I won't name the sleeping pill, though at the end I'm going to talk about sleeping pills, and had a case of total amnesia for a week. That's not entirely uncommon. If you've ever been really jet lagged and fallen asleep, doesn't even have to be in the middle of the day, woken up, you might not know where you are. And that's because time and space are really linked in the brain, wasn't designed to be transported four, five six hours into a new time zone, it just wasn't. Our brain and the biological mechanisms that govern circadian timing were designed to be shifted by a couple hours, not necessarily six or nine or 12 hours. So you can really mess yourself up. I've had that experience, I usually experience it as fluctuations in mood. I flew 12 hours out of phase, to Abu Dhabi once, to give a talk at NYU Abu Dhabi, and it was a mess. I actually was getting vertigo. I wasn't hallucinating but I was really out of it. And my mood was just all over the place. And it was very bizarre. Jet lag, even if you don't experience it as mood shifts or amnesia, it can shorten your life. Now here's what's interesting. Traveling westward on the globe is always easier than traveling eastward, okay? It's interesting because the effects of jet lag on longevity, have shown that traveling east takes more years off your life than traveling west. Now, of course, traveling 30 minutes into a new time zone or just one time zone over, or two times zone over rather, is far less detrimental to your biology and psychology than a eight hour shift or a nine hour shift. Now, here's what's interesting. When we think about the effects of jet lag on longevity or this idea that it can shorten our lives, we have to ask ourselves why, why is that? And it turns out there's a pretty simple explanation for this. We've talked before about the autonomic nervous system, this set of neurons in our spinal cord and body and brain that regulate our wakefulness and our sleepiness. Turns out that human beings, and probably most species, are better able to activate and stay alert than they are to shut down their nervous system and go to sleep on demand. So if you really have to push, and you really have to stay awake, you can do it, you can stay up later. But falling asleep earlier is harder. And that's why traveling east has a number of different features associated with it, that because you're traveling east you're trying to go to bed earlier, you know. As a Californian, if I go to New York city, I've got to get to bed three hours early and wake up three hours early, much harder than coming back to California and just staying up a few more hours. And this probably has roots in evolutionary adaptation where under conditions where we need to suddenly gather up and go or forge for food, or fight, or do any number of different things, that we can push ourselves through the release of adrenaline and epinephrin to stay awake. Whereas being able to slow down and deliberately fall asleep is actually much harder to do. So there's an asymmetry to our autonomic nervous system that plays out in the asymmetry of jet lag. So, if you want to read up on this, because people have asked me about papers, you can look, there's a paper published by Davidson and colleagues, 2006, in Current Biology that talks about the differences in life span for frequent eastward versus westward, versus no travel and longevity and etc. A number of different biological markers of longevity. So going east is harder because going to sleep earlier is harder, if you're trying to do that on demand. Many people have turned to melatonin as a way to try and induce sleepiness. I'm going to talk about melatonin at the end. I've mentioned on previous podcasts, a number of you have asked for the evidence that melatonin is potentially detrimental to some hormone systems, melatonin is a hormone. And I'll discuss that at the end, in particular, the role of melatonin in suppressing a hormone pathway that involves luteinizing hormone testosterone in men and estrogen in females. As well as a really interesting peptide called kisspeptin, that's a cool name. All right, well, let's think about travel and what happens. Let's say you're not going eastward or westward but you're going north or south. So if you go from for instance, Washington DC to Santiago Chile, or you go from Tel Aviv, Israel, to Cape town, South Africa, you're just north and south, right? And not either direction. You're not really moving into a different time zone, you're not shifting. So you will experience travel fatigue. And turns out that jet lag has two elements, travel fatigue and time zone jet lag. Time zone jet lag is simply the inability of local sunlight and local darkness to match to your internal rhythm, this endogenous rhythm that you have. So before we get too complicated and too down in the weeds about this, I want to just throw out a couple important things. First of all, I mentioned this earlier, but some people suffer from jet lag a lot, other people not so much. Most people experience worse jet lag as they get older. There are reasons for that because early in life, patterns of melatonin release are very stable and flat and very high actually in children. It's one of the reasons why they don't undergo puberty. Then it becomes cyclical during puberty, meaning it comes on once every 24 hours and turns off once every 24 hours, it cycles, cyclic. And then as we get older, the cycles get more disrupted and we become more vulnerable to even small changes in schedule, etc, meal times, right? So, jet lag gets worse as we age. In addition, there are other things that happen with age that people start doing less exercise, their digestion can get worse, etc. So some of the effects of age might not be direct effects of getting older but some of the things that are correlated with being older. Like people who are willing to have a regular exercise regime can use that exercise regime to shift their circadian clock. And I have a good friend, his father is in his 80s. He's still pushing out 25, 30 push-ups each morning, he's on the Peloton or whatever it is, doing a lot of cycling. So some 80-year olds are doing that, many are not, many 30 year olds are not. But if you have a regular exercise program, that's going to make it easier to shift your circadian clock for the sake of jet lag. And it's actually a knob you can turn and you can leverage for shifting your clock. Before we go any further, I want to make changing your internal rhythm really easy. Or at least as easy and as simple as one could possibly make it, I believe. What I want to talk about is perhaps one of the most important things to know about your body and brain, which is called your temperature minimum, okay? Most of you know your approximate weight, some of you might even know your blood pressure, some of you might even know your body mass index, some of you might know other things about your biology that have fancy names, but everyone should know their temperature minimum. Your temperature minimum doesn't require a thermometer to measure, although you could measure it. Your temperature minimum is the point in every 24 hour cycle when your temperature is lowest. Now, how do you measure that without a thermometer? It tends to fall 90 minutes to two hours before your average waking time. So I want to repeat that, your temperature minimum tends to fall 90 minutes to two hours before your average waking time. So let's say you're not traveling and your typical wake up time is 5:30 AM. Your temperature minimum is very likely 3:30 AM or 4:00 AM. If you want, if any of you want to, you can measure your temperature minimum. You can get a thermometer and you can measure your temperature every couple hours for 24 hours, and you can find your temperature minimum. What you're going to find is that you have a low point, the temperature minimum, and then your temperature will start to rise, you'll wake up about two hours later. Then your temperature will continue to rise into the afternoon it will peak, maybe a little trough, sometimes that happens, and then it'll start declining slowly as you approach nighttime. There are things that will disrupt that temperature pattern. Saunas, cold baths, intense exercise, etc. Meals tend to have a thermogenic effect that increases temperature slightly little blips, but the overall cycle 24 hour cycle of temperature has this pattern. And last time I talked about the seminal work of Joe Takahashi and others, who have shown that temperature actually is the signal by which this clock above the roof of your mouth in-trains or collectively pushes all the cells and tissues of our body to be on the same schedule. Temperature is the effector. And once you hear that there should be an immediate, oh, of course, because how else would you get all these different diverse cell types to follow one pattern, right? A pancreatic cell does something very different than a spleen cell or a neuron, right? They're all doing different things at different rates. So the temperature signal can go out and then each one of those can interpret the temperature signal as one unified and consistent theme of their environment. So temperatures vary from person to person. Some people are 98.6, some people run a little colder, etc. But you have a low point, and you have a high point. Know your temperature minimum. How are you going to figure out this temperature minimum? The temperature minimum can be determined by taking the last three to five wake up times. So let's say you wake up 7:00 AM, 8:00 AM, 3:00 AM, all right it happens. Take those, add them together, average them by adding them up and dividing by the number of days, that'll give you the average. If you're one of these people that wakes up at 3:00 AM and then goes back to sleep and sleep till 10, your wake up time was 10:00 AM. If you use an alarm clock, your wake-up time is still when you get up, okay? I know alarm clocks have been kind of demonized but in my world being late and missing appointments is also demonized, so I use an alarm clock. Many people will wake up at exactly the same time each day, there tends to some variation for people. Some people it's going to vary depending on life circumstances. But average that for three to seven days or so. Take that wake up time, you can then get an average or sort of typical temperature minimum. Okay, so now you know how to get your temperature minimum. Your temperature minimum is your absolute reference point for shifting your circadian clock. Whether or not it's for jet lag, or shift work, or some other purpose. Here's the deal. If you expose your eyes to bright light in the four hours, maybe five or six, but in the four hours after your temperature minimum, your circadian clock will shift so that you will tend to get up earlier and go to sleep earlier in the subsequent days, okay? So it's called a phase advance, if you'd like to read up on this further. You advance your clock, okay? However, if you view bright light in the four to six hours before your temperature minimum, you will tend to phase delay your clock. You will tend to wake up later and go to sleep later. Okay, I'm going to repeat this because there's so much confusion out there and people talk about circadian time and all this. Find your temperature minimum. I tend to wake up at about 6:00 AM, sometimes 6:30, sometimes seven. It depends a lot on what I was doing the night before as I'm guessing it does for you. But that means that my temperature minimum is probably somewhere right around 4:30 AM. Which means that if I wake up at 4:30 AM and I were to view bright light at 4:35 AM, I'm going to advance my clock. I'm going to want to go to bed earlier the subsequent night and wake up earlier the subsequent morning. And as I shift my wake-up time, my temperature minimum shifts too, right? Because each time we shift our wake-up time our temperature minimum shifts, assuming that wake up time shifts more than 30 minutes or an hour, okay. If I were to view bright light in the four to six hours before 4:30 AM, guess what? The next night I'm going to want to stay up later and I'm going to want to wake up later the subsequent morning. Your temperature minimum is a reference point not a temperature reading. Again, if you want to measure your temperature minimum and figure out what it is, 98 point whatever or 96 point whatever, that's fine. You can do that. But that information won't help you. What you need to know is what time your body temperature is lowest and understand that in the four hours or so just after that time, viewing light will advance your clock to make you want to get up earlier. And the four hours before your temperature minimum, viewing light will make you want to stay up later. Now, some people might be saying, well, I wake up early and I want to stay up late and I'm sleepy all day and I'm a mess or I feel fine. Look, let's talk about feeling fine. Turns out the definition of insomnia is when you're experiencing excessive sleepiness during the day. Sleepiness and fatigue are different, okay? So in the world of sleep medicine fatigue is a physical exhaustion, sleepiness is falling asleep. Like falling asleep at your desk or falling asleep during lectures, or there seems to be something special about my lectures that makes people want to fall asleep. So if this cures your insomnia fantastic, however, in all seriousness, sleepiness during the day time unless it's around your temperature peak and only lasts about 90 minutes or so, is a sign of insomnia. It's a sign of lack of sleep. I want to be very, very clear that if you know your temperature minimum, you can shift your clock using light. You can also shift your clock by engaging in exercise in the four hours after your temperature minimum to wake up earlier on subsequent nights, or exercise before then to delay your clock, okay? So now you can start to see and understand the logic of the system. And we'll talk about why this works and the underlying biology, but understanding that temperature is the effector and understanding that you have this low point that reflects your most sleepy point, essentially right before waking up, and then temperature rises, you can now start to shift that temperature according to your travel needs. Here's one way in which you might do that. Let's say I am going to travel to Europe, which is nine hours ahead typically, from California. I would want to determine my temperature minimum which for me is about 4:30 AM maybe 5:00 AM, and I would want to start getting up at about 5:30 AM and getting some bright light exposure, presumably from artificial sources because the sunlight isn't going to be out at that time. Maybe even exercising as well, maybe even eating a meal at that time if that's in your practice. You would want to start doing that two or three days before travel. Because, once you land in or I land in Europe, chances are just viewing the sunrise or sunset in Europe is not going to allow me to shift my circadian clock. Some people say get sunlight in your eyes when you land but that's not going to work because one of two things is likely to happen. With a nine hour shift like that either I'm going to view sunlight at a time that corresponds to the circadian dead zone, the time in which my circadian clock can't be shifted, or I'm going to end up viewing sunlight at a time that corresponds to the four to six hour window before my temperature minimum. So it's going to shift me in exactly the opposite direction that I want to go. So it can be very, very challenging for people to adjust to jet lag. So you need to ask, am I traveling east or am I traveling west? Am I trying to advance my clock or delay my clock? Remember viewing light, exercise and eating in the four to six hours before your temperature minimum will delay your clock. Eating, viewing sunlight, and exercising, you don't have to do all three but some combination of those in the four to six hours after your temperature minimum will advance your clock. And this is a powerful mechanism by which you can shift your clock anywhere from one to three hours per day, which is remarkable. That means your temperature minimum is going to shift out as much as three hours, which can make it such that you can travel all the way to Europe and in as long as you've prepared for a day or so by doing what I described back home and then doing it when you arrive, you can potentially accomplish the entire shift within anywhere from 24 to 36 hours. And this is really important to emphasize that once you arrive in your new location and here I'm talking about traveling eastward, California to Europe, once you arrive in your new location, you have to keep track of what your temperature minimum was back home and how it's being shifted during your trip. Now it's much easier to do than you think. One of the unfortunate consequences of the smartphone is that you can't do something goofy like wearing two watches. One watch that corresponds to the time back home and another one that corresponds to the local time. Typically it updates automatically based on wifi, etc. But if you can keep track of the time back home then you can easily shift your clock going forward. I'm hoping this will makes sense. I really want to emphasize that you don't have to be precise down to the minute. Some of you may be asking, well, what about you've got this temperature minimum and if I view light one minute before it then I'm going to delay my clock and one minute after it I'm going to advance my clock. It doesn't quite work like that, okay. But it's very important to understand that light is the primary way in which we can shift our clock. And now you should also be able to understand things like the circadian dead zone from about 9:30, 10:00 AM all the way until six hours before your temperature minimum. You're not going to shift your clock. Nothing that you do in that time in terms of light viewing behavior, feeding, etc, is going to shift your clock. And so a lot of people are landing in Europe getting sunlight in their eyes and throwing their clock out of whack or not shifting their clock at all. This brings me to the other thing that's highly recommended. And I've mentioned this before, but you want to eat on the local meal schedule. If it's in your practice to fast, fast, that's fine. But when you eat, you want to eat within the local schedule for alertness. Okay. That means if you arrive and everyone's eating breakfast and you can't stomach the idea of breakfast in your new location 'cause your appetite isn't there. That means the clock in your liver, you have a clock in your liver, biological clock, has not caught up to the new time zone. You can force yourself to eat if you like, or you can skip that meal. But what you don't want to do is stay on your home meal schedule, waking up in the middle of the night and eating. That is really going to throw things off because a lot of the clocks in the periphery like from the liver, the peripheral body, will send information back to the brain and then the brain is getting really conflicted signals. So the temperature minimum is really your anchor point for shifting your clock best. I don't know why this information really hasn't made it into the popular sphere, quite so much. There's all sorts of stuff about taking things like melatonin, using binaural beats, a lot of kind of like more sophisticated, complicated, and potentially problematic ways of trying to shift the clock. Let's talk about melatonin but first I just want to pause and shift gears a little bit because I talked about traveling eastward, but we haven't talked about traveling westward. So I want to do that now. Let's say you're raveling from New York to California or from Europe to California. The challenge there tends to be, how can you stay up late enough? Now, some people are able to do this because as I mentioned earlier, the autonomic nervous system is asymmetrically wired such that it's easier to stay up late later than we would naturally want to than it is to go to sleep earlier. So let's say you land and it's 4:00 PM and you're just dying, you're in California, you came from Europe, it's 4:00 PM and you really, really want to go to sleep. That's where the use of things like caffeine, exercise, and sunlight can shift you, right? If it's after your temperature peak then viewing sunlight around 6:00 PM or 8:00 PM or artificial light, if there isn't sunlight, will help shift you later, right? It's going to delay your clock and you're going to be able to stay up later. The worst thing you can do is take a nap that was intended to last 20 minutes or an hour. I do this routinely and then wake up four hours later or you wake up and it's midnight and you can't fall back asleep. You really want to avoid doing that. So provided it's not excessive amounts, stimulants like caffeine and coffee or tea can really help you push past that afternoon barrier and get you to sleep more like on the local schedule. And eating on the local schedule as well. A number of people have asked about the use of melatonin to induce sleepiness. All right, well let's think about what melatonin is. Melatonin is this hormone that's released from the pineal gland, which is this gland. A couple of notes about the pineal, 'cause I've been getting a lot of questions about this. I'm probably going to draw some fire for this but I'd be happy to have a thoughtful, considerate debate, with some peer reviewed papers in front of us. The pineal does make this hallucinogenic molecule they call DMT, but in such a minuscule amounts that it is not responsible for the hallucinations you see in sleep and dreaming. Sorry, folks. It's also not responsible for the hallucinations you might see through other approaches to DMT. It's just not, that's not where the DMT comes from. It's infinitesimally small amounts. There are a lot of kind of wacky claims out there about calcification of the pineal and fluoride and this kind of thing. Look, the pineal sits in an area of the brain near the fourth ventricle, where the skull is not terribly far away although there's some overlap in neural tissue and with age there's some aggregation of some of the meninges and other things around there that stick to the skull. Young brains don't look like old brains but there's no calcification of the pineal, all right? So you can forget about calcification of the pineal as a problem. I don't know where that whole thing got started but that's not an issue. Your pineal will churn out melatonin your whole life. Melatonin induces sleepiness. Melatonin during development is also responsible for timing the secretion of certain hormones that are vitally important for puberty. Does melatonin control the onset of puberty? Not directly, but indirectly. Melatonin inhibits something called gonadotropin-releasing hormone, which is a hormone that's released from your hypothalamus also roughly above the roof of your mouth in your brain. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone is really interesting 'cause it stimulates the release of another hormone called luteinizing hormone, which in females causes estrogen to be released within the ovaries, it's involved in reproductive cycles, and in males stimulates testosterone from the sertoli cells of the testes. Melatonin is inhibitory to GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing hormone, and therefore is inhibitory to LH, luteinizing hormone, and therefore is inhibitory to testosterone and estrogen. There's just no two ways about it. There is immense amount of data on the fact that high levels of melatonin in seasonally breeding animals, takes the ovaries from nice and robust ovaries that are capable of deploying eggs and this kind of thing and literally shrinking them and making these animals infertile. These are very high levels of melatonin in seasonal breeders in winter. Melatonin in males of seasonal breeders takes the testes and shrinks them. Long ago when I was at UC, Berkeley as a master's student, I was working on neuroendocrinology, and we were working on this hamster species of seasonal breeders. And basically when days are long, which inhibits melatonin, these little Siberian hamsters as they're called, have testes about the size of, sort of typical table grapes, although that's a weird way to put it. When days get shorter and the melatonin signal gets longer because light inhibits melatonin, days get shorter, melatonin gets longer. Those same hamsters would have testes that would involute to the size of about a grain of rice. Now this does not happen in humans in short days. But nonetheless, the melatonin signal really does have a ton of effects on the hormone system. Now, does that mean that if you've been taking melatonin you've really screwed up your hormones? Not necessarily. Does it mean if a kid has been taking melatonin that's really screwing up their puberty? Not necessarily and here's why. Melatonin operates on a concentration level. So in a child that's very, very small that has high levels of melatonin, it actually can inhibit GnRH, LH, testosterone or estrogen depending on the sex of the child. But as that child grows through other mechanisms, like growth hormone release, etc, that same amount of melatonin released from the pineal is now diluted over a much larger body so that the concentration actually goes way, way down, okay? But here's the problem with supplementing melatonin. As I mentioned in the previous episode, concentrations of melatonin in many commercial supplements have been shown to be anywhere from 85% to 400% of what's listed on the bottle. So when you take melatonin or a child takes melatonin oftentimes they are taking super physiological levels of melatonin, which at least by my read, and the literature, says that it could have dramatic effects on timing and course of things like puberty. So it's not so much that the journals have come out saying, oh, taking that melatonin inhibits puberty, it's that no single study has been done with the super physiological levels of melatonin that are present in a lot of these supplements in developing children. So melatonin is used widely for inducing sleepiness when you want to fall asleep in the new location that you've arrived, right? You can't fall asleep, you take melatonin, it helps you fall asleep. It does not help you stay asleep. In addition to that, melatonin has been kind of touted as the best way to shift your circadian clock. I'm happy to go on record saying, look, if you need melatonin, you can work with a doctor or somebody who really understands circadian and sleep biology go for it, if that's your thing. But I, as always on this podcast and elsewhere, I have a bias toward behavioral things that you can titrate and control like exposure to light exercise, temperature, etc, that have much bigger margins for safety and certainly don't have these other endocrine effects that we've been thinking about and talking about. So if you want to take melatonin in the afternoon in order to fall asleep or in the evening, be my guest, that's up to you. Again, you're responsible for your health, not me. But for many people melatonin is not going to be the best solution. The best solution is going to be to use light and temperature, and exercise on either side of the temperature minimum to shift your clock both before your trip and when you land in your new location and your clock starts to shift. Okay, so now you know my opinions about melatonin, feel free to filter them through your own opinions and experiences with melatonin. And now you also understand what your temperature minimum is and how it represents an important landmark either side of which you can use light, temperature, and exercise to shift your clock. Just to remind you a little bit about temperature, if you want to shift your clock, typically you would do that by you can take a hot shower and then that will have a cooling effect after the hot shower. And if you were to get into a cold shower or an ice bath if you have access to one, afterward there's going to be a thermogenic effect of your body increasing temperature. And if you just think about your natural rhythm back home when everything's stable, you have an idea a low point in which is your temperature minimum, and then you have a peak, and you think about when you're doing this hot or cold shower in that rhythm, now you should be able to understand how you're shifting your rhythm. That temperature rhythm is the one that's going to move. Give you an example. If I were to wake up in the morning and let's say I wake up at 6:00 AM. My temperature I know is rising, I've passed my temperature minimum. If I were to get into a hot shower, that would then lower my body temperature when I got out, that is not normally what's happening first thing in the morning, and therefore my clock would very likely get phase delayed, right? It's going to delay the increase in temperature. Whereas if I got into a cold shower, something I don't personally like to do, but I've done from time to time or an ice bath that's going to then have a rebound increase in body temperature and is going to phase advance my clock. That peak in the afternoon is going to come about an hour earlier. I'm going to want to go to bed earlier, later that night. So you can start to play these games with timing and hot and cold, with meals whether or not you eat, or you don't eat, and with light exposure, whether or not you view light or you don't view light. So now you can start to see why understanding the core mechanics of a system can really give you the most flexibility because I could spend the next 25 years of my life answering every question about every nuance pattern of travel. Well, we're going to Sydney and then we're going there, what should I do? But that's on you. You need to figure out your temperature minimum and your temperature peak, if you like, and then use these parameters to it gives you flexibility. And that really underscores the most important thing is that when you understand mechanism it's not about being neurotically attached to a specific protocol, it's the opposite. It gives you power to not be neurotically attached to a specific protocol. It can give you great confidence and flexibility in being able to shift your body rhythms however you want. And when things get out of whack you can tuck them right back into place. One thing that's common is that people need to do a quick trip. It's not always that you're going to go to, you know on vacation for two weeks or, you know, work someplace else for weeks on end. If your trip is 48 hours or less, stay on your home schedule. This can be tough and it may require scheduling meetings according to your home schedule, but if you can somehow manage that the best thing to do would be to stay on your home schedule. Your clock is not going to shift more than a couple hours, even if you do everything correctly in one day, okay? So if I were to travel, say to Europe, I've actually done this, I did a 24 hour trip to Basel, Switzerland, gave a talk and came back, people thought I was crazy but, I had a little bit of travel fatigue 'cause remember there's fatigue from the actual travel experience. The novelty of it, the air is never great on the planes, this was even true before there were mask requirements and things like that. There's the travel fatigue but you don't throw your clock off. If you stay 48 hours, then you start to shift a little bit. 72, that's when you start running into trouble. The transit time is also important but I would say if it's three days or less, stay on your home schedule as much as you can. And because sunlight isn't under your control unless there's something about you I don't know, that's when traveling with some sort of bright light like the light pad that I have down there that I showed earlier, for those of you listening just on audio, it sort of looks like an eight and a half by 11 inch pad. It's actually not designed for wake up, it's actually designed, it's a drawing pad, and it emits about 1,000 lux of light. And so if you want to travel with something like that, you can use that in your hotel room to wake up when you like. Some people will use night shades, you know, not the night shades that you eat or that some people say you're not supposed to eat, I don't know anything about that, but the eye covers to keep light out. Those can be very useful on planes and in hotels and so on. So you can use light and dark or you can travel with your light and dark devices so that you can stay on your home schedule and get most of your light when it would be your normal wake up time back home. And what's kind of nice is if you know when your circadian dead zone is back home, which is generally for most people around 10:00 AM to about 3:00 PM, so basically the rising phase of your temperature, then you can also feel free to be outside without having to wear sunglasses or you don't have to worry about light exposure. But if you know that window before your temperature minimum, that four to six hour window, that's the time when if you're viewing a lot of light in your new location, you are going to shift your clock pretty considerably and then you can come back home and have a terrible time. At the end of graduate school, I went to Australia, remarkable country, incredible people, incredible wildlife, had amazing time, I came back and it was the first time in my life where I couldn't sleep on a regular schedule. I was sleeping in like hour long increments throughout the day, it was a nightmare. And it took me weeks to get back on target. And the way I was able to do that was exercising consistently at the same time every 24 hours, turning my home into essentially a cave at night, even covering up the windows and then getting as much bright light in my eyes as I possibly could during the day, no sunglasses, etc. So it can take some real work if your clock gets thrown out of whack. There's a phenomenon called ICU psychosis, where people that are in the intensive care unit in hospitals actually lose their mind. They become psychotic, hallucinations, etc. And it's because of altered circadian cycles. We know this 'cause they're exposed to these lights and these sounds, people coming in and checking on them. They leave the hospital or in some cases, there have been experiments where people are placed near a window where they get some natural light and the psychotic symptoms disappear, presuming there weren't psychotic symptoms beforehand, before they entered the hospital. So it's pretty dramatic what light can do to the psyche and to the body. So let's talk a little bit about a different form of jet lag that requires no planes, no trains, no automobiles, and that's shift work. Shift work is becoming increasingly common. Many of us are shift working even though we don't have to. We're doing work in the middle of the night, we are, you know, working on our computers at odd hours, sleeping during the day. A lot of people who are under shelter and place type stuff, are doing more of this. Kids with the drifting school schedules. Here's the deal with shift work. If there's one rule of thumb for shift work, it's that if at all possible, you want to stay on the same schedule for at least 14 days, including weekends. Now that should immediately cue the non shift workers to the importance of not getting too far off track on the weekend, even if you're not a shift worker. So sleeping in on Sunday is not a good idea. The most important thing about shift work is to stay consistent with your schedule. Now, I had a conversation on an Instagram live with Samer Hattar, who's a neuroscientist at the National Institutes of Mental Health, he's actually the head of the chronobiology unit there. And he was really emphasizing this point because shift work where people are doing the so-called swing shift, where they're working four days on one shift and four days on or another, is extremely detrimental to a number of health parameters. It gets the cortisol release from the adrenals really out of whack. And there're these cortisol spikes at various hours of the day, it messes up learning, it really disrupts the dopamine system and wellbeing. It is a serious, serious problem. So if you can negotiate with your employer to stay on the same shift for two weeks at a time, that's going to be immensely beneficial and will help you offset a lot of the negative effects of shift work. Now, I don't presume that all of you are going to be able to do that. Some of you just don't have that level of control. And of course, I want to acknowledge that shift workers are essential, right? Of course, first responders, firefighters, police officers, paramedics, etc, but also pilots, night nurses, people working on the hospital wards, people picking up trash. These night shifts are critical to our functioning as a society, as I'm sure all of you can appreciate. If you're going to work a shift where let's say, you start at 4:00 PM and you end at 2:00 AM, excuse me, then there's some important questions that arise. For instance, should you see light during your shift? Well, this is a matter of personal choice but ideally you want to view as much light as possible and as is safely possible when you need to be alert. So that would mean from 4:00 PM to 2:00 AM and then you would want to sleep. So using light as a correlate of alertness and using darkness as a correlate of sleepiness, what this means is see as much light as you safely can during the phase of your day when you want to be awake. So it's the same thing I said way back at the beginning of this podcast episode. And see as little light as safely possible and it allows you to function during the time when you want to be asleep. So if you're finishing out that 2:00 AM shift, that's when you would want to avoid bright light exposure, you'd want to go home, you'd really want to avoid watching TV if possible. If you need that in order to fall asleep, that would be a case where something like dimming the screen, plus blue blockers, if that's in your practice or you want to do that would be helpful and then going to sleep and then you'll probably wake up late in the afternoon or early afternoon. Some of you might say, wait, Huberman, I thought you don't like blue blockers. I never said I don't like blue blockers. I don't like people wearing blue blockers at the time of day when they want to be alert. And I don't like people asserting that blue blockers can prevent circadian shifts simply because people are wearing them. The brightness of light is what's important it's not about the blue. So if you want to wear them, wear them, or just dim the lights or turn the lights off. So let's say you go to sleep at, you get home after this 4:00 PM to 2:00 AM shift, you maybe eat something, you go to sleep, and you wake up and it's noon or 1:00 PM. Should you get light in your eyes? Well, your first assumption based on what I've said previously might be that you're in the circadian dead zone that you can't because it's noon 1:00 PM. But you're not in the circadian dead zone because you're somebody who goes to sleep early in the morning at 2:00 AM. So it's not like the circadian dead zone is a strict time of day, it's an internal biological clock. So what do you need to know? You guessed it, you need to know your temperature minimum. You need to know whether not your temperature is increasing or decreasing. And now we can make this whole thing even simpler and just say, if your temperature is decreasing, avoid light. If your temperature is increasing, get light. It's that simple, okay? If your temperature is decreasing, avoid light, if your temperature is increasing, get light. The shift worker who works from 4:00 PM until 2:00 AM has a temperature rhythm that's very different than mine where I wake up around 6:00 AM, 5:00 AM, and I go to sleep around 11:00 PM, okay? We both have a 24 hour-ish circadian cycle, except mine is more aligned to the rise and setting of the sun and there's is not, right? So you have to know your internal temperature rhythm. And no you don't have to walk around with a thermometer wherever, taking your temperature. Although it'd be great if some of the devices that are out there, you know, people are counting their steps, I think it'd be great if people had a circadian body temperature measurement. I'm not involved in any of this device development but I think it's a real call to arms, pun intended, to have a wristband that would measure temperature and would tell you your temperature minimum when you travel or whatnot. I don't know, maybe some of these devices already do that. But if they don't, they should. It's absolutely absurd to me why we wouldn't have the simple measurement, very easy to get that kind of information. You don't even need the exact temperature read all you need to know is the high and low point. So let's say you're a shift worker who really is nocturnal, you're flipped. Well, you want to stay on that nocturnal schedule. Now that can be very hard on families and social life of all kinds. But the person who is working say from, you know, 8:00 PM, like sundown to sunrise, this raises a question. Should they be looking at the sunrise and should they be watching the sunset? Waking up with a sunset, going asleep at the sunrise. You think, well, is that light going to throw them off? Ah, probably not. It's just actually going to invert what sunrise and sunset are. When they're waking up in the morning, if they look at the, you know, they get some sunlight in their eyes, they look at the sun and get some bright light from devices or overhead lights in their apartment or home, well, that's going to tend to wake them up if it's in the evening, right? So it's, you know I don't know if I stated that clearly, but if in the evening the sun is setting and they're looking at that setting sun, that is the morning sun for that person and it will wake them up for their night shift. So temperature rising. Then toward morning, what's happening? Okay, well, they're closing out their work shift. You're going home, the sun is rising. Do you look at the rising sun? Well, based on what you now know your eyes are very sensitive to resetting of circadian clocks. What will it do at that time? If this were a classroom, I would either cold call on somebody or I'd wait for the oh, oh, oh, oh person in the audience that inevitably exists. So temperature is for that person, they've been up for a while, temperature is falling, not rising. For me it will be rising. But 'cause I'm diurnal, I'm awake during the day. For that person the temperature's falling and so they view light while temperature is falling. What's it going to do? It's going to phase delay them. It's going to make it harder for them to get to sleep the following night. So you would say that person should watch the setting sun to help them wake up 'cause they're going to work the night shift, but should probably have sunglasses on or avoid viewing bright light before they go to sleep. So it's the same thing. They're just on an inverted as a typical person who's diurnal, but they're on an inverted schedule. And so I'm really trying hard here to make this all really clear. There are kind of two patterns of requests in the world I'm noticing as I've kind of ventured into the this landscape of social media and podcasts. There are people who want to know every detail and want to quantify everything 'cause they want to get exactly right. These are like the graduate students and students that don't want to make a mistake. And to quote my graduate advisor, provided the mistakes are not dangerous, certainly not lethal, you kind of want to make a few little mistakes so that you can adjust, right? You don't want to endanger yourself. But it's actually, you're not going to get things perfect, that's called learning. Learning is when you realize, ah, I viewed the sun this time and then I stayed up and it really messed me up, I'll never do that again. The other category of people seem to want the one size fits all kind of like give me this pill or give me this protocol. And those things generally work but they don't afford people flexibility. And if there's anything like that, it's this temperature minimum thing that I've been just hammering on again and again and again today because it's something that you own and that you can really use as a key landmark for shifting your clock. I suppose there's a third category, which is, people accept that biological systems are actually much more forgiving than the way they're sometimes described. And I'm going to use this as an opportunity to editorialize a little bit. You know, there's so much made of sleep debt. Look there isn't an IRS equivalent for sleep. They're not going to come around and try and collect all the sleep that you didn't get. No one really knows what the consequences are going to be for you and for me and for the next person for the sleep you didn't get. You can't really recover the sleep you missed out on, but you also don't want to get neurotically attached to a schedule because there's this thing called sleep anxiety and then people have trouble falling asleep and staying asleep. So I want to spend a moment on that and go back to a theme that I've said many times before, because these tools work what I called NSDR, non-sleep deep rest. So this would be hypnosis, I gave you the link, but I'll say it again, reveriehealth.com for clinically tested, research tested free hypnosis for anxiety but also for sleep. Those are very beneficial people. NSDR protocols, non-sleep deep rest protocols for things like yoga nidra, I provided some links to those in the caption for episode two. These things really work. Last night, I woke up, I went to bed about 10:30, I woke up at three in the morning, I knew I wasn't feeling rested. I did a NSDR protocol, I fell back asleep, I woke up at 6:30, okay. You need to teach your brain and your nervous system how to turn off your thoughts and go to sleep. And ideally you do that without medication unless there's a real need, you do that through these behavioral protocols. They work because they involve using the body to shift the mind not trying to just turn off your thoughts in the middle of the night. Now there are periods of life where things are stressful and people are concerned and you will have some struggle getting and staying asleep. And there's, that really has to do more with anxiety which NSDR protocols also can help with. As I always say, do them in the middle of the night if you wake up and you want to go back to sleep during the middle of the day, to teach your nervous system to calm down and do them first thing in the morning if you didn't feel you got enough sleep. In other words, do them whenever you have an opportunity to do them because they really can help you learn how to turn on the parasympathetic/calming arm of your autonomic nervous system. There's no other way that I'm aware of to teach your system to slow down and turn off your thoughts and go back to sleep. But these are powerful protocols, and there's a lot of research now to support the fact that they can really help. Meditation would be another example. Certain kinds of meditation involve focus and alertness. Those are slightly different than meditations that involve lack of focus and attention to say internal states. I'm going to pause there, and then I want to talk about kids and the elderly. In other words, how do we control sleep and circadian rhythms and wakefulness in babies, adolescents, teens, and aged folks. All right, before we talk about sleep in kids, I want to tell a little story. It's not a joke, many of you will be relieved that I'm not going to try and tell another joke this episode. Which is the relationship between light, skin and pelage color, dopamine and reproduction, mating. So many seasonally breeding animals, Siberian hamsters which I mentioned earlier, rabbits, fox, other animals, change their color of their coat. In the winter they tend to be a lighter color, sometimes pure white, sometimes with flecks of black or brown. And in the summer their pelage changes to a color of you know, brown or red, some other vastly different color. That shift is controlled by light and by melatonin. This has an interesting correlate in humans. So humans obviously have different skin tones just genetically because of the amount of melanin in one skin, depending on genetic background. But of course sunlight will increase the amount of melanin in the skin regardless, right? This is suntan, sunburn, etc, bronzing, whatever. The whole system is wired so that shifts in skin color and shifts in these cells within the eye and melatonin are actually very closely linked. So here's the story. Many years ago, meaning about 10 years ago, 15 years ago, let's see it was 20 years ago, forgive me. A guy named Iggy Provencio who was running his own lab at uniformed armed services, this is a standard biological laboratory, discovered that there was an opsin in the eye in the cells of the eye that connect to the rest of the brain called melanopsin. Melanopsin, as many of you now know is the opsin, it's like a pigment, it absorbs light. It is the opsin that converts light into electrical signals to then set the circadian clock. Iggy discovered melanopsin because it was similar in form to what was in frog melanophores. It was actually in the skin of frogs that allowed those frogs to go from pale white, when it was dark, for most of the 24 hour cycle, to pigmented green or brown for a frog. So there's this relationship between the cells in our eye and the pigment cells of our skin. And we also know that in long days, there's more breeding. How does that work? Well that's actually from dopamine triggering increases in testosterone, mainly in males, and estrogen mainly in females although of course, there's testosterone estrogen in both sexes. So we have this kind of pathway where it's light, increases in the melanin, dopamine and reproduction on the one hand and lack of light, melatonin, decreases in the darkness of skin, less melanin in the skin, or in the case of an animal with fur, white fur and no reproduction on the other hand. And humans don't actually shift their breeding patterns tremendously from long days and short days, although there are some data that there's some shifts. We also don't radically change our skin color depending on how much sunlight exposure we have. But the simple way to put this is, when days are long, there's a lot more dopamine and we feel really good and there's a lot more breeding and breeding-like behavior. When days are short, there's a lot less dopamine and a lot less breeding behavior because these pathways are very highly conserved. Now what's interesting is that, as we've moved into a modern society where much of our waking days we are looking at screens, which is fine, 'cause we're getting a lot of light that way although not as much as sunlight. But also at night, we're getting a lot of light from screens. What's happened is all these path ways, melanin in the skin, turnover of skin cells, dopamine, all of this stuff has become completely disrupted. Now that's not to say that we should go back to a time in which we didn't use artificial lights. But I think the important thing to realize is that feeling good with getting a lot of light, the relationship to dopamine and melanin in the skin, and the good feelings of getting light also on our skin provided you're not getting burned or you're not getting excessive UV exposure, those are not just coincidences. Those are hard-wired biological mechanisms that exist in everybody regardless of how light or dark your skin is to begin with. There's another point, which is important, which is that the dopamine system which is this feel-good molecule is very closely related to the testosterone and estrogen in reproductive cycles. Remember melatonin inhibits gonadotropin-releasing hormone, luteinizing hormone, and the production of these hormones, and melatonin is the effector. It is the hormone of darkness. So, I just threw a lot of biology at you. And I'm not saying you're like a Siberian hamster, at least not in ways that I'm aware of. I'm not saying that your pelage color is going to change. Actually the reason people go gray is because when you're really stressed, did you know this, that when you're really stressed, there's an increase in the nerve fibers that release adrenaline to the hair follicle and that activates peroxide groups in the hair follicle that cause the hair to actually go gray or white. So actually stress does make your hair gray or white. Aging does it too. That was a brief aside, but for those of you that are interested in the relationship between light and skin tone and all that kind of stuff, I thought you might find it interesting that the cells in your eye are a lot like these skin cells in frogs or in animals that shift their entire color and sometimes metamorphosize. You know, there are some species that literally change shape in their reproductive organs. In fact, if that wasn't weird enough, when I was in graduate school at Berkeley, there was another graduate student studying a species of hermaphroditic mole, right, those little things that dig, hermaphrodite mole that would change from having ovaries to testes and back again depending on day life. Super cool, super different, and wild biological mechanism. If you're wondering how those animals reproduce they actually adjust the numbers of males and females depending on the density of males and females. So if there are too many males, some of the males turn their testes into ovaries. And if there're too many females, they turn their ovaries into testes. They actually are true hermaphroditic animals as opposed to as pseudo hermaphrodite animals. Okay, let's get back on track. Let's talk about the animal that most of you care about which is the human animal. New parents and babies. All right, as I mentioned earlier, melatonin is not cyclic, it's not cycling in babies, it's more phasic. It's being released at a kind of a constant level. And babies tend to be smaller than adults, they are. And so those concentrations of melatonin are very high. As the baby grows, those concentrations per unit volume are going to go down. Babies are not born with a typical sleep wake cycle. And now all the parents are saying, tell me something I didn't know. They also have, and I really want to emphasize this, they also have much more sensitive optics of the eye. So a number of people have asked me, you know, should I be exposing my baby to sunlight? You don't want to avoid sunlight, but their eyes are very sensitive, the optics of their eyes aren't quite developed so much so that you know when you look at a newborn baby and they look a little glassy-eyed and they're kind of looking through you or even a young child. A lot of people think that they're seeing you the way that you're seeing them. Hate to break it to you, but if you ever can just google visual image of a like a one month old. The optics of their eyes are so poor that you're a cloudy image. They're not seeing your fine detail. As the optics get better, then they will see you with more and more clarity. But a lot of that is clearing of the lens and some of the other aqueous features of the newborn eye, they don't see very well. But they also don't have such great ways of adjusting to bright light. And so babies have a natural aversion to bright lights. So you really want to avoid trying to use sunlight or really bright light in the same way that you would for an adult on a young baby or child. As children get older however, melatonin does start to become slightly more cyclic, slightly more cycled, and their body temperature rhythms also start to fall into a more regular, not quite 24 hour rhythm, they're more of these ultradian rhythms. So in episode, I think it was one or two of the podcast, or maybe both, we talked about these 90 minute so-called ultradian rhythms, where every 90 minutes babies are going through a cycle of body temperature and some other hormonal features. I mean, so much is changing in their system. So what to do if a child isn't sleeping? You can use phases of darkness and phases of light but they're going to have to be shortened in order to try and encourage sleep when you want the child to sleep. It's not that they're just not going to fall into an adult-like regime of a temperature minimum and a temperature maximum. Their temperature minimums and maximums are fluctuating much more quickly. And it varies tremendously. Actually there's an interesting literature of whether or not they have siblings, whether or not they're twins, whether or not they're in a nursery environment, whether or not they're alone, hopefully the baby's not alone, but you know what I mean, that they're sleeping alone in a room while you're in the other room. There are a couple of things that seem to help which is getting the overall environment into a 24 hour schedule. So having the room slightly colder, obviously you want babies to be nice and cozy, slightly colder when you would like them to be asleep, slightly warmer for the times you would like them to be awake. Babies tend to run pretty hot anyway. And obviously you want to be very careful about avoiding all extremes of temperature, cold or hot. So if they're going through these 90 minute cycles, you're going to have to adjust to those 90 minute cycles as well. So then people say, well, that's not going to help me at all because how do I deal with the fact that I need to be up every 90 minutes at night? There are a couple tools that can be helpful. The first one is going to be to try and understand the relationship between calm and deep sleep. So the autonomic nervous system can put us into states of panic, where that's kind of seesaw of autonomic alertness, goes all the way to panic. Or it can be alertness, or it can be alert and calm, right? So there's a range there, it's a continuum. It can also be that you're in deep sleep, so the other end of the seesaw is way up or you're your in light sleep or you're kind of sleepy, or you're just feeling kind of relaxed. Perhaps the most important thing if you're having to map to a baby schedule in order to make sure that they're getting changings, and nursing, etc, at the appropriate times, is to try and maintain, if you can't sleep or you can't sleep continuously, to try and maintain your autonomic nervous system in a place where you're not going into heightened states of alertness when you would ideally be sleeping. Now, I realize that this could be translated to try and stay calm while you're sleep deprived, which is very hard for people to do. But this is where the non-sleep deep rest protocols surface again and can potentially be very beneficial for people to be able to recover, not necessarily sleep, but for them to maintain a certain amount of autonomic regulation. So what would this look like? This would look like, the baby goes down, maybe it's only going to go down for 45 minutes. If you can capture sleep, capture sleep. There are some data showing what's called polyphasic sleep. If you can sleep in 45 minute increments or batches, even if it's spread throughout the day with periods of wakefulness in between, as miserable as that sound, there are actually some adults that have deliberately employed that, who don't have children for the sake of work productivity. And it does tend to reduce the total overall amount of sleep that you need. It is a very hard schedule for most people to maintain but if you have a baby, the baby may be throwing you into that kind of schedule anyway. So if you can get 45 minutes sleep while they sleep, great. If you can get another 45 minutes after waking and then they go back down to sleep, great. So as many phases of sleep as you can get. But if you can't sleep the data on non-sleep deep rest type protocols does show that at least from a neurochemical level, I want to be clear what that means, reset of things like dopamine levels in the basal ganglia measured by things like positron emission tomography, etc. Those things tend to reset themselves pretty well if you can access these deep rest state. So that means not being alert throughout the entire time that the baby is sleeping. Trying to sort of mirror the baby's sleep cycle which can be brutal for certain people, and especially if you're trying to prepare meals and do all these things. So I do recognize that there are a lot of constraints on parenting not just mapping on your baby's sleep schedule. As children approach ages one, two, three, four, that's when certainly the optics of the eyes have improved but you don't want to damage the eyes of course, with very bright light. They are much more sensitive even until they're kind of 10, 11 years old. And we'll talk about vision in children in a moment. But trying to get longer and longer batches of sleep through, hopefully not through the use of administering melatonin to the kids 'cause that's what I talked about before why that could potentially be detrimental talk about that with your doctor. But more so trying to get longer blocks of sleep that map onto these ultradian cycles. So it would be better off to get a three hour, like two-90 minute cycles, than a four hour batch of sleep because waking up in the middle of those ultradian cycles can just be brutal for parent and kid. So if one can't get a full six or 10, or some kids should even be sleeping 12 hours when they're growing quickly, trying to get batches of sleep even if they're fractured throughout the 24 hour cycle that are matched more to these 90 minute cycles, meaning maybe one ultradian cycle of 90 minutes, or two back to back, or three back to back to back. That's going to be better than waking up in the middle of an ultradian cycle. It's just going to set any number of other things in a better direction than were you to try to say, just enforce or force a full eight or 10 hours of sleep. That's at least what the literature shows. Some kids sleep great through the night, starting at a very young age, others don't. I typically hear from people who are struggling tremendously, they're losing their mind understandably, because they're not sleeping, their kid's not sleeping and, or their kid is sleeping for such brief periods. So in other words, try and access deep calm if you can't sleep, try and access sleep, if you can sleep even if it's fractured. And then you say, well, what about all the sunlight viewing and the exercise stuff? When sleep is really, really dismantled, meaning it's happening in various times of day or night, that's especially, at those times it's going to be especially important for the parent to get morning and evening sunlight because your circadian clock is going into a tailspin and it basically wants to anchor to something. So you want to give it two anchors, morning and evening light. Okay, so this is rather different than what I described for shift work, this is when things are really chaotic and you're just not able to sleep. Similar circumstances can arise if you're taking care of a very sick loved one, you're up all night. Try and stay calm using NSDR protocols, I know it's harder to do than to say, but those protocols are there, they're free, there's research to support them. Try and get sleep whenever you can but also try to get morning sunlight and evening sunlight in your eyes if you can and if you can't get that, use artificial light, okay? What about later life? So kids now, adolescents, teens, it is true that teens have a tendency to wake up later and go to sleep later. In part, just because they're sleeping a lot more. They're churning out gonadotropin-releasing hormone and luteinizing hormone. Their whole bodies are changing. I don't know whether or not people realize this, but the fastest rate of aging that any of us will ever undergo is puberty. That is the fastest rate of aging. And so there's a huge number of biological processes that are happening during puberty, probably devote a whole episode to puberty as a fascinating aspect to the life course but it is accelerated period of aging. And the circadian clock mechanisms sometimes are very intact, and sometimes they're a little dismantled and going through some change, but prioritize the duration of sleep for adolescents and teens. Now, if that means they're sleeping until 2:00 PM, and then waking up and then they're up all night, the up all night part can become a problem especially with all the devices, texting in their rooms or playing video games. Morning and evening sunlight would be ideal but some kids are just going to sleep through the morning sunlight. However, if you were to measure their temperature, what you would find is that their temperature minimum would come later in the morning. It's not going to be 8:00 AM. It's going to be maybe even 10:00 AM, if they're sleeping until 11 or 12. Or it might be 8:00 AM if they're sleeping until 10. Remember temperature minimum is two hours before your average waking time, typically. So in teens, it maximizes the total amount of sleep. Try and get regular sunlight either in the morning or in the evening or both. But if they're sleeping through the morning sunrise, that's probably not as much of an issue, waking them up and depriving them of sleep is probably worse because their T-min, their temperature minimum, is actually falling later. So their circadian dead zone is later, etc. So I think with adolescents and teens it makes sense to kind of give them a little bit more rope in terms of allowing them some leeway to adjust their own schedule. Some schools are even starting classes later on the basis of some very good biology to support this late shifted rhythm and this extended sleep phase. There are data from Dr. Jamie Zeitzer, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, and others at Stanford, showing that turning on the lights in the room of a teen before they wake up helps them get more sleep the subsequent night, it also tricks them into going to sleep a little bit earlier. But it gives them about 45 minutes more of deep sleep. And that's been shown statistically, total sleep time increases as well. If they're hiding under the covers, that's not going to work, but their eyes don't have to be open. I know a few parents now that are coming in with a flashlight and flashing their kids over their eyelids before they wake up in hopes of getting this to work, some have told me this is working. That's not part of a standard study. But it does seem to work because, now you should know why, because if light's getting through the eyelids, and it's say 8:00 AM and the kid is still asleep and they're going to wake up at 10, you're giving them light just after or around their temperature minimum, which is going to make them want to go to sleep earlier. And in the case of teens, for some reason we don't quite understand, sleep longer, about 45 minutes longer, spend more time in deep sleep. Adults can do this too, if you can persuade someone or put your lights on timer for lights to go on before you wake up, that's really going to help you wake up earlier, okay. So if you're starting to hear some themes are really resounding over and over again, that should be reassuring to you, right. That these are core mechanisms. Fortunately, there aren't 1,000 different mechanisms. Now in the elderly, there's a real tendency to want to go to sleep very early and wake up very early. And people should talk to their physician. There is some evidence that melatonin levels and patterns of melatonin secretion can become a little chaotic in elderly folks. What do I mean by elderly? Well, it's going to differ. Rates of aging differ, right? You see some 65 year olds that are struggling to move and seem much older than some 65 year olds that are, you know, still hustling around and have tons of energy. There's a lot of variation, some of it's genetic, some of it's lifestyle factors, you know, it really varies. Certainly lifestyle factors can play an important role in rates of aging. I think that the most prominent results from sleep and circadian rhythms in the elderly are they need to get as much natural light, even if it's through windows. I realize that some elderly folks can't get outside as easily. It's not safe for them to do it, they can't move around as easily. Exercise can come in various forms for people that can't get outside and get a ton of sunlight by jogging or cycling. If they're not able to do that, light through window in that case, open window ideally, but for temperature reasons, etc, sometimes the window has to be closed. Getting people near that window and away from artificial light early in the day, and away from artificial lights during the night phase can have a tremendous effect. And in the elderly that's when melatonin might be a viable option. And this should be discussed with a physician, of course, but you know, you're way past the puberty time point. In most cases, people who are in their 70s, and 80s, and 90s, are not churning out a lot of GnRH and luteinizing hormone to begin with. And that's where struggles with falling asleep and staying asleep, all the same parameters and things we've described before still apply, light, exercise, temperature, etc, but that's where melatonin might be of greatest benefit. And again, I'm not pushing melatonin here but I think for elderly folks who are having trouble falling and staying asleep, that might be worthwhile. There are, and I should just also mention that regular schedule for folks that are elderly and as much natural light as safely possible, those are going to be the key levers for adjusting sleep in circadian schedules. I've mentioned before in previous podcasts, other supplements besides melatonin. And some of those supplements are quite good for sleep. You know, I'm not a supplement pusher, I am somebody who takes supplements, I believe in them, some have worked for me some have not worked as well, but I certainly believe in getting the behaviors right. Whether or not it's NSDR protocols, viewing natural light, exercise, hot baths, or cold showers, or what have you, behavioral protocols first. There are some supplements that I've mentioned in previous podcasts but I've seemed to get a lot of questions about. So I just want to take a couple minutes and just talk about some of the supplements that can be beneficial for helping turning off thinking, accessing deeper sleep, and even being able to compact your sleep schedule into a shorter period of hours, meaning getting by well with less sleep. People take a lot of sleeping pills. I'm not going to tell people not to take sleeping pills. They can be very problematic, habit-forming, high side-effect incidents in many cases, some people can handle them just fine. Again, I'm no physician, I'm not prescribing anything. I'm a professor, so I profess a lot of things some of which are my opinion. Although, if you look at the scientific literature, there are some impressive data around some non-prescription drug type supplements that have fairly high safety margins that you might consider but you should talk to your doctor always before adding or taking anything out of your health regimes, right? Your health is not my responsibility, it's your responsibility, so be a stringent filter. Along those lines, one of the most powerful and useful tools that I've mentioned here on many times and I plan to mention many many more times, is the website examine.com which I have no affiliation with but is a wonderful site that links you to quality peer reviewed studies relating to just about any supplement including some safety warnings. Will also tell you what subjects, whether or not it was rats, cats, elderly folks or kids, that a given study was done on, which is important, can be kind of hard to pull from sites where people are just advertising supplements, right? They usually don't tell you what the study was and who were these rats, who were these kids, etc. There are three supplements that at least for me have had a tremendously positive effect on my sleep that some of you might consider. I would say, if you're doing everything properly behaviorally and you're still having issues, then supplements might be a good thing for you. Or if you are traveling and you want a little bit of extra help in buffering your sleep wakefulness protocols. Some people like to go just to the supplements. They're like, what should I take? I have people in my life that are like, just tell me what to take, you know. I'm more of, here's what you might want to do or not do and then think about what you might want to take or not take. But personal preference and it's a free country, so you can do what you like. Magnesium. So magnesium has been shown to increase the depth of sleep and has been shown to decrease the amount of time that it takes to access sleep, to fall asleep. It comes in various forms. I've talked a bunch of times about magnesium threonate, T-H-R-E-O-N-A-T-E, threonate. which seems to be the more bioavailable form of magnesium. And magnesium threonate it seems is shadowed preferentially to the brain which is where you want it. And there's certain transporters, it actually engages the GABA pathway which tends to turn off certain areas of the forebrain and allows you to kind of fall asleep. There is a study, if you'd like to explore it since people serious about supplementation might want to explore the study, which is Ates et al, A-T-E-S Dose-Dependent Absorption Profile of Different Magnesium Compounds. Looks to me like a quality peer reviewed paper. I can put the link in the caption, and it explores all the different forms of magnesium. It does seem like magnesium glycinate can be similar to magnesium threonate in terms of which tissues it is shadow to. Magnesium malate, M-A-L-A-T-E, is preferentially shadow to the muscle, it appears, as opposed to the brain. So it's going to be more of a muscle repair type thing or restoring magnesium stores in the periphery as opposed to the brain. Magnesium citrate has another name that I won't mention ingest, because magnesium citrate's main effect, at least on me and the people I know, seems to be a laxative effect as opposed to a cognitive effect. There's also some evidence that magnesium threonate can be neuroprotective. Those data come from quality labs, mostly rodent studies, not human studies, but it's kind of interesting. And again, the safety margins for these things tend to be pretty high, but anytime you're going to take something new you should approach it with caution, especially since magnesium could be involved in heart rhythm and things of that sort. The other supplement that has been very beneficial for me is theanine. So this is T-H-E-A-N-I-N-E, theanine, T-H-E-A-N-I-N-E. Theanine activates certain GABA pathways which are involved in turning off top-down processing and thinking, making it easier to fall asleep. And theanine, 100 milligrams to 300 milligrams has a calming effect. Theanine is now showing up in a number of different energy drinks and even some coffees as a way to try and get people to ingest more of a given type of coffee 'cause the idea is it will take away the jitters and the anxiety, allowing people to drink more coffee. I'm talking about taking magnesium and theanine 30 to 60 minutes before bedtime not during the day to quell anxiety, but rather 30 to 60 minutes before bedtime with or without food, for me hasn't made a difference. And the combination of those two things has really helped. Theanine for sleepwalkers can be a problem. It does increase the intensity of your dreams, it gives you very vivid dreams. So for sleep walkers or people that get night terrors stay away from theanine is my advice. Magnesium theanine might be something to explore for those of you that don't have those issues. With the emphasis on might. And then I've talked about a compound, and last time I talked about the mechanisms of apigenin which is a derivative of chamomile, A-P-I-G-E-N, which acts as a little bit of a hypnotic by activating chloride channels, hyperpolarized neurons, increases GABA in the brain, basically makes you feel a little sleepy. And chamomile, for those of you that read your what was it that Peter Rabbits snuck into Mr. McGregor's garden, ate the chamomile, fell asleep, Mr. Gregory came back. Okay, anyone flashing back to elementary school? Okay. There's a story about chamomile having these kind of sedative-like effects, apigenin is highly concentrated chamomile also has intra-estrogenic effects. So if you want to keep your estrogen up you might want to be cautious about apigenin. That's where things like examine.com become really useful because you can go to examine you put in apigenin, and it'll tell you all the things that it does and all the things that it does can sometimes include things that you had no idea, like reducing conversion of certain androgens to estrogens which you might like or you might want to avoid. That's up to you and where you want your estrogen levels depending on who you are and what your life circumstances and goals are. A few other things that can help the transition to sleep, are things like 5-HTP L-tryptophan. I've talked about why I'm not a fan of those for me, they tend to throw me into deep sleep and then I wake up and I can't fall back asleep. So I don't like to tinker with my serotonin system, I don't like to tinker with my dopamine system, for entirely other reasons but none of which are particularly concerning it's just that I find that if I increase my dopamine by taking L-Tyrosine in pill form, then I crash really hard the next day. Or if I take 5-HTP L-tryptophan I fall deeply asleep and then I wake up. But I didn't mention that there might be ways to make sleep more compact. And so this is actually a request to you. I had a really interesting experience when I was a postdoc. I went for the first time to an acupuncturist. I know there're varying thoughts and opinions out there about acupuncture. I can't say that I've benefit so much from the acupuncture. There are now quality peer reviewed studies showing publishing neuron, Cell Press journal, excellent journal, showing that acupuncture can stimulate some anti-inflammatory compounds depending on where the acupuncture is done. These are really good studies, came out last year. I talked about this on Instagram, I may talk about it again. As well as certain acupuncture sites that increase inflammation. So, you know, you can get different types of effects, you can't just say acupuncture is great across the board. And I'm assuming that the acupuncturist know which sites are good for increasing inflammation, which ones are good for decreasing inflammation. However, this acupuncturist that I went to gave me these red pills. He said, these are minerals for sleep, and it was remarkable. I took the red pills. Isn't that a thing now? Take the red pill. I don't know what that means, right, 'cause I'm not tuned in. But these red pills looked like little M&Ms, I took a couple of them on his suggestion and I fell deeply asleep and four hours later woke up feeling incredibly rested, more rested than I had ever felt in my entire life and I never required more than four hours sleep. Unfortunately, acupuncturist moved away, I never figured out what was in those red pills. I didn't get a chance to do the mass spectroscopy, and I still wonder, he said they were minerals. So somebody out there knows what these red pills are and what this compound is. And it was incredible, and I would love to know what those are. So if you know, please don't go taking red pills at random to try and recreate this non-experiment experience of mine. But please do contact me if you find out or if you're an acupuncturist and you know what these mysterious red pills were, because they were pretty awesome. Once again, I've thrown a tremendous amount of information at you. I hope you will figure out your temperature minimum and start working with that to access the sleep and wakeful cycles that you want to access. I hope that you will explore NSDR. You might want to explore supplementation if that's your thing. You have now access to a lot of mechanism about sleep and wakefulness. But in keeping with the theme of this podcast, where we stay on topic for an entire month or even slightly more, we are not done with sleep and wakefulness. I know this is very different than the typical podcast format, where one week it's how to become superhuman and the next week it's how to, you know, develop growth mindset and it's kind of all over the place with episode to episode. We are staying on track because I really believe that as we drill deeper and deeper into these mechanisms, and you start hearing some of the same themes again and again, you're going to start to develop an intuition and an understanding of how these systems work in you and your particular life circumstances. And my goal is really to eventually become obsolete. It's what my graduate advisor used to call the hit by a bus principle. She had a somewhat morbid sense of humor and used to be, well, if I get hit by a bus tomorrow, what are you going to do without me blabbing at you here? So I don't want to get hit by a bus, I plan on living a very long time, if I have anything to say about it. But were I to get hit by a bus tomorrow, what would you do for your sleep and wakefulness, right? You could put a comment on YouTube, which I hope you will do. But if I were hit by a bus and killed then I wouldn't be able to answer your question. So know your temperature minimum, understand light in the early part of the day is valuable. Light when you want to be awake, provided it's not so bright it's damaging. It's great for you whether or not it comes from screens or sunlight but sunlight's better. Avoid light in the four to six hours before your temperature minimum or else you're going to delay your clock unless you're traveling and that's what you want to do. Okay? Use temperature, increase temperature to shift your clock, decrease temperature to delay your clock, okay? Map out your temperature and understand it. You don't have to know degree by degree across the day, know your minimum, know your maximum temperature in your 24 hour cycle and you'll feel great power through that because then you'll know also about these ultradian cycles, these 90 minute cycles within which you can do focused work. Don't expect the focus to come early, expect focus to come in the middle and then kind of taper off. I talked a little bit about kids, a little bit about elderly, about parenting, we are going to continue, there's going to be more. But now shift workers, travelers, people that are jet lagging themselves at home, you now have levers in place. Information can be powerful but you have to implement it in ways, obviously safe ways and reasonable ways. But implementing this knowledge in the ways that you trust are safe and reasonable for you is going to be the way that you can develop a bit of a laboratory about yourself. I loath the term biohacking, sorry, biohackers. I don't believe in hacking anything. I believe in understanding mechanism and applying the principles of mechanism for which there are large bodies of quality peer reviewed data, and even a whole center of mass around certain biological principles, like the effects of light and temperature, temperature minimums, that will allow you to shift your biology in the ways that you want it to go. That will allow you to shift your psychology in the ways you want to go. Next podcast episode, we are going to talk more about a few things. First of all, we're going to answer more of your questions 'cause during office hours, I didn't get to all your questions from the previous episode. So I do read the comments and we're paying attention and figuring out the most common questions. We are going to get to some of the harder topics. Someone came at me, it's always fun when somebody does this, they said, well, these are just the kind of basal low-level questions. What about the big stuff? What about dreaming and lucid dreaming and consciousness? Look, I'll talk about that stuff. And I'm planning to do that, some of which in the next episode and the following episode maybe even. But I want to give you data. I want to give you things that are supported by data. So I will try to speculate as little as possible because this is a podcast about science and science-based tools for everyday life. This is not about me speculating. Many people have speculated about the role of sleep, dreaming and consciousness. Fascinating topics, and a rather circular argument frankly, it's been going on for centuries. Someday we'll get there, right now we're concentrating on these deep biological mechanisms that make you who you are and allow you to feel certain ways, good or bad, allow you to function physically in certain ways, good or bad, and give you more of a sense of control. That's my goal here. Many people have quite graciously asked how they can help support the podcast. First of all, thank you, we appreciate the question. You can support the podcast by subscribing to the podcast on YouTube, as well as subscribing on Apple or Spotify. And you can also leave us comments and feedback on YouTube and at Apple that really helps. We would hope the feedback would be positive, but nonetheless, leave us feedback, ask questions, we will use those questions to create future content for the podcast. As well, if you can recommend the podcast to friends and family and other people that you think might find the information of use, that's terrific. And check out our sponsors that we mentioned at the beginning. That's a really great way to help support us and our ability to bring you this information. Along those lines, a lot of people have asked me about supplements and supplement companies. So up until now I've been reluctant to recommend specific supplement brands. The supplement industry is kind of a wild west of different brands, different levels of quality and stringency. It can be very complicated and what's on the bottle is not always what you're getting. The quality of what you're getting varies from company to company, and even from substance to substance, batch to batch. So I'm pleased to say that I'm partnering with Thorne, Thorne, spelled T-H-O-R-N-E, is a supplement company that works with the Mayo Clinic, and with pretty much all the major sports team organizations and that I know to have the highest levels of stringency in terms of what's in the bottle matches what's listed on the bottle, and in terms of the quality of what they put in those supplements. So, while I mentioned earlier, that supplements aren't for everybody. If you're interested in trying some of these supplements you might want to check out Thorne. If you want to do that you can go to thorne.com/u/huberman. So it's t-h-o-r-n-e.com, c-o-m slash the letter u slash huberman, and if you do that, they'll give you 20% off any of the supplements that you happen to purchase from Thorne. Thanks so much for your time and attention. I really appreciate it. See you next time on the Huberman Lab Podcast. And as always, thanks for your interest in science. [bright music]

========================================

--- Video 346 ---
Video ID: nwSkFq4tyC0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nwSkFq4tyC0
Title: Using Science to Optimize Sleep, Learning & Metabolism
Published: 2021-01-18 13:00:25 UTC
Description:
“Office Hours” — In this episode, I answer your most commonly asked questions about science-supported tools for accessing more alertness, better learning, and quality sleep. I also cover when to exercise, time meals, and how to systematically vary your temperature to achieve specific effects on your nervous system. 

For an updated list of our current sponsors, please visit our website as previous sponsors mentioned in this podcast episode may no longer be affiliated with us: https://www.hubermanlab.com/sponsors

*Follow Huberman Lab*
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

*Timestamps*
0:00 - Introduction
5:50 - Moonlight & Fire
9:25 - Red Light: Good & Bad
15:45 - Why Blue-Blockers Are Unscientific
19:20 - Eyeglasses, Contact Lenses & Windows
22:05 - Adding Up Your Lights
24:30 - “Netflix Inoculation” With Light
25:25 - How The Planet Controls Your Energy
27:00 - A Season For Breeding (?)
31:15 - Melatonin / Serotonin 
33:50 - Epinephrine vs Adrenaline: Same? Different?
35:00 - Exercise & Your Sleep
40:30 - Neuroplasticity & Food/Chemicals/NSDR
44:10 - Using Sound & Smell To Learn Faster
46:45 - Dream Meaning & Remembering
48:15 - Waking Up Paralyzed 
49:40 - Nap/Focus Ratios For Accelerated Learning
52:45 - Hypnotizing Yourself
54:05 - Smart Drugs
1:01:10 - Magnesium: Yay, Nay, or Meh?
1:02:10 - How Apigenin Works 
1:04:30 - Serotonin: Slippery Slope
1:05:35 - The Frog Experiment
1:08:35 - Temperature
1:10:30 - Morning Chills
1:28:00 - Eating For Heating
1:30:30 - Vagal Pathways For Gut-Brain Dialogue
1:31:50 - Sex Differences
1:33:50 - Self Experimentation

#HubermanLab #Science #Exercise

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English
[upbeat music] - Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. This podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. Along those lines, I want to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens, which is an all-in-one vitamin mineral probiotic liquid supplement. I've been using Athletic Greens since 2012 because I really like getting my total vitamin mineral base covered in one easy to consume product. It also tastes really good. I mix mine with a little bit of lemon juice. I've been doing that well over a decade now. And the inclusion of probiotics is important to me because there's a lot of data out there right now about the importance of gut health for the immune system for, mood. And so by combining all these things in one product you get all those things at once. If you want to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman and that will give you a special offer where you will get a year supply of liquid vitamin D3 and K2 vitamin D3 has been shown to be important for various aspects of immune function as well as other biological functions. And so once more, if you want to try athletic greens and get the year supply of vitamin D3 K2 just go to athletigreens.com/huberman. The other sponsor of today's podcast is InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a way to measure metabolic factors, hormones, and DNA related factors by way of blood tests and saliva in order to assess one's health. I'm a big believer in blood tests and saliva tests for assessing one's health markers, because I like data. And there's really no other way to measure what's going on in one's body without taking the occasional blood test or saliva test. You can guess what's going on but if you really want to know what's going on under the hood InsideTracker can be of great help. One of the problems with a lot of products out there or just regular blood testing is that you get a lot of data back about the levels of various hormones, metabolic factors, et cetera, but you don't know what to do with those data. Great thing about InsideTracker is provided in a format. They have an online dashboard that given your particular levels of various things directs you toward potential lifestyle related changes like changes in exercise, or changes in sleep patterns, or changes in nutritional patterns, that can really help move those markers and those numbers on those metabolic factors, hormones, et cetera in the direction that you want. If you'd like to try InsideTracker you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman. And if you do that, you'll 25% off their program at checkout. Okay, let's get started. Today is episode three of the podcast and it is office hours. Office hours as many of you know, it's where students come to the office of the professor, sit down and ask questions, requesting clarification about things that were confusing, or to simply go down the route of exploring a topic with more depth and detail. I asked for your questions to be listed in the comment section of the previous two episodes of the podcast on YouTube, as well as on Instagram. And I first of all just want to thank you for the many questions, they are excellent. We read them all. We distilled from that large batch of questions to two types of questions. Questions that were asked very often and were light very often with a little thumbs up like tab as well as questions that we thought could really expand on the topics that we've covered previously. And today we're going to cover both of those. If we did not get to your question, please don't despair. We will keep track of those. And we have several more episodes devoted to this topic of sleep and wakefulness and learning during the month of January, maybe even, leaking over a little bit into the month of February. So, we have time that's one of the unique formats of this podcast is that we have time for dialogue, we have time for your questions and we have time to really go deep into these topics. It's official Costello is sleeping in the background. So if you hear snoring, Costello is going to be keeping time with his deep and melodic snoring. There he goes. So the questions that we received, I batched crudely into a couple of different categories, light, exercise, supplementation, temperature, learning, plasticity, and mood, and sort of mood related disorders. There were a lot of questions about those. Before we begin any of this I want to point out something that I, I always say it sounds like boiler plate but it's important not just to protect me but to protect you, which is that I am not a physician. I'm not a medical doctor. I don't prescribe anything, including behavioral protocols. I'm a professor. So I profess a lot of things based on quality peer reviewed studies. You should take that information. You should filter it through whatever it is that you currently happen to be dealing with, whether or not that's health or illness, you should consult with a licensed healthcare professional before you add or remove anything from your daily life protocol. I'm not responsible for your health. You are, so be smart with this information and be a stringent filter, as we say. Okay, very well let's get started on the actual material. Somebody asked, what is the role of moonlight and fire, I'm presuming they mean fireplace or candle or things of that sort, in circadian rhythms. Is it okay to view moonlight at night or will that wake me up? Will a fire in my fireplace or using candle light be too much light. Great question, also offers me the opportunity to share with you what I think is a quite beautiful definition of what light is in a quantitative sense. So I've mentioned a few times the use of apps and light meters and things to measure things like locks, which sometimes are also described in terms of Kendals. So those are the two units for measuring light intensity. Typically lux, L-U-X is the, is the unit. And so before we go forward and discuss this many lux or that many lux, I want to just tell you what a lux is because it relates to this question. One lux equals the illumination of one square meter surface at one meter away from a single candle. Think about that. So somebody actually decided at some point that the amount of illumination at one square meter surface, one meter away from a single candle, that equals one lux. So when we talk about 6,000 lux of light intensity or 10,000 lux of light intensity, now you have a kind of a reference or a framework that would be the equivalent of, you could think of it as 6,000 candles all with their light intensity shown on one square meter from one meters distance away. Or of course, if it was a different number of lux it would be a different number of candles. So you get the idea. Here's the great thing. It turns out that moonlight, candle light, and even a fireplace, if you have one of these roaring fires going in the fireplace, do not reset your circadian clock at night and trick your brain into thinking that it's morning even though if you've ever sat close to a fireplace or even a candle, that light seems very bright. And there are two reasons for that that are very important. The first one is that these neurons in your eye that I discussed in the previous episode these melanopsin ganglion cells also called intrinsically photosensitive ganglion cells. Those cells adjust their sensitivity across the day, and those cells respond best to the blue-yellow contrast present in the rising and setting sun, so-called low solar angle sun, also discussed in the previous episode, but those cells adjust their sensitivity such that they will not activate the triggers in the brain that conveyed daytime signals when they view moonlight, even a full moon a really bright moon or fire. Now this does raise an interesting kind of thought point, which is, you know, a lot of people talked about lunacy and the fact that when there's a full moon out people act differently and behave differently. There's a lot of lore around that. There's actually a little bit of quality science around that that maybe we can address in the future. But, moonlight is typically not going to wake us up too much, except maybe the moon is really full and really bright, there's possibility for that. So, providing you're not going to burn down the structure you're in, you're not going to burn down the forest, enjoy your, your fireplaces, enjoy your lights from candles. And those are perfectly safe without disrupting your circadian rhythm. Because we talked about just how crucial it is to avoid bright lights between the hours of about 10:00 PM and 4:00 AM. Except when you need to view things for sake of safety or work or so and so forth. I also received a lot of questions about red light. Now, I think I was asked those questions because red light is used in a number of different commercial products where these products tend to include a sheet, of very bright red lights. That one is supposed to view early in the day. And there are various claims attached to these red light devices that they improve mitochondrial function, that they improve metabolism there- I'm going to be really honest and I can't name brands, and I'm not going to name particular studies. 'Cause what I'm about to say about these studies is not particularly unkind but let's just say that none of the studies that I've seen except for one that I'll talk about in a moment, pointing to the positive effects of red light on the visual system are published in blue ribbon journals. They tend to be published in journals that I had to work hard to find. I'm not sure what the peer review and stringency level is. Now, that's not to say red light isn't beneficial because there is one study in particular that came from Glen Jeffrey's Lab at the University of College, London it was published last year. Glen is somebody I happen to know is an excellent reputation, excellent vision scientist, what this study essentially showed. And again, this is a study that I very much liked the data and think it was done with very high standards. What this study shows is that, viewing red light for a few minutes each morning can have positive effects on mitochondria in a particular retinal cell type, that tends to degenerate or decline in function with age in humans. And that cell type is the photoreceptor. The photoreceptor is a type of cell in your eye that sits at the back of the eye. It's kind of some distance away from the ganglion cells. And it's the cell that converts light information into electrical signals that the rest of the retina and brain can understand. These are vitally important cells without them, people are blind. And many people's vision gets worse with age. In particular, age related macular degeneration but also related to some other factors including photo receptor functionality just getting worse with time. And what Glen showed was that red light flashes delivered in particular early in the day but not late in the day can help repair the mitochondria. Now this study needs more support from additional studies of course. They are doing a clinical trial. They did report on what I think it was 12 patients. And so the work is ongoing, but that was very interesting. And it points to some potentially really useful things about red light. However, most of the questions I got about red light for sake of office hours were about the use of red light later in the day. So here's the deal, in principle red light will not stimulate the melanopsin retinal neurons that wake up the brain and circadian clock and signal daytime. However, most of the red lights in particular the red lights that come on these sheets of these products that people are supposed to view them in order to access a number of proclaimed health effects, those are way too bright and would definitely wake up your body and brain. So if you're going to use those products and I'm not suggesting you do, or you don't, but if that's your thing, you would want to use those early in the day. Who knows you might even derive some benefit on mitochondria function in these photo receptors. But if you're thinking about red light for sake of avoiding the negative effects of light later in the day and at night, then you want that red light to be very, very dim, certainly much dimmer than is on most of those commercial products. Now, do you need red lights? No. Although red lights are rather convenient because you can see pretty well with them on, but if they're dim, they won't wake up the circadian clock. They won't have this dopamine disrupting thing that we talked about in the previous podcast. So there's a role for red light potentially early in the day and for mitochondrial repair in the photoreceptors, there's a role for dim red light later in the day and at night. So you're starting to notice a theme here which is that, there's no immediate prescription of look at these light, it's look at these lights potentially if that's what you want to do at particular times of day and we're particular intensities. It brings us back to the blue light issue which is so many people are obsessed with avoiding blue light, but you actually want a ton of blue light early in the day and throughout the day. So don't wear your blue blockers then or maybe even don't wear them at all. And at night, it doesn't matter if you have blue blockers on if the lights are bright enough, then you're still going to be activating these cells and mechanisms. I just want to add something about the science behind the blue blocker confusion. So these melanopsin retinal cells do react to blue light. That that is the best stimulus for one of these melanopsin cells, which led to the belief that blue blockers would be a good thing for preventing resetting of the circadian clock at night and deleterious effects of screens, et cetera. However, the people that made these products fail to actually read the papers from start to finish or if they did, they didn't comprehend a critical element which is that most of those papers early on took those neurons out and put them in a dish. And when they did that, they divorced those neurons from their natural connections in the eye. It turns out in your IMI right now, because that's what we care about, these cells exist and the cells respond to blue light but also to other wavelengths of light because they not only respond directly to light as they do in a dish, they also respond to input from photo receptors. So if you talk to anyone in the circadian biology field, they'll tell you, "Oh, yeah this blue light thing, has really gotten out of control." Because people assume that blue light is the culprit because blue light is the best stimulus. That doesn't mean that blue light is the only stimulus that will trigger these cells, okay? So like many things a scientific paper can be accurate without being exhaustive. And a lot of claims about products can be accurate, but not exhaustive. So blue light during the day is great. Get that screen light, get that sunlight especially getting overhead lights. I'll talk about all this in the previous podcast, but at night you really want to avoid those bright lights. And it doesn't matter if it's blue light or something else. And so there was a real confusion about the papers and the data when most of those product recommendations were made. Okay. While we're on that topic, let's talk about light in other orifices of the body. I made a kind of a joke about this, the last podcast episode but a couple of people wrote to me and said, well, I've seen some claims that light delivered to the ears into the ears or the roof of the mouth or up the nose can be beneficial for some setting circadian rhythms, no. Not directly anyway. And this is a great opportunity for us to distinguish between what is commonly called the placebo effect but a more important way to think about any manipulation behavioral or otherwise that you might do is the difference between modulation and mediation. There are a lot of things that will modulate your biology. Putting a couple of lights up your nose, please don't do this. Might modulate your biology by way of the stress hormone that's released when you stuffed those things up your nose. Remember earlier a previous podcast, I said that virtually anything we'll face shifts your circadian rhythm if it's different and dramatic enough. So the question is, is it the light delivered up the nose or through the ears or some other orifice that's mediating the process? Is it actually tapping into the natural biology of the system that you're trying to manipulate? And this is where I like to distinguish between real biology and hacks. I don't like the word hack or frankly neuro hacking or bio hacking. I just don't like the term because a hack is is using something for a purpose for which it was not intended, right? But where you can kind of, it's kind of a cheat and that's not how biology works well. So I try and distinguish between things that really mediate biological processes and things that Modulate them. There are a number of commercial products out there with some studies attached to them, claiming that light delivered to the ears or wherever can adjust your wakefulness or adjust your sleep. I've looked at those papers again, I'm probably going to lose some friends by saying this but maybe I'll gain a few as well. Not blue ribbon journals, frankly, oftentimes read the small print. There was a conflict of interest clause there related to commercial interests. If somebody disagrees with me outright on this and can send to me a peer reviewed paper, published in a quality journal about light delivered anywhere, but the eyes of humans that can mediate circadian, rhythms, wakefulness et cetera, I'm more than happy to take a look at that and change my words and stance on this and do it publicly, of course. But until then I'm guessing that the proper controls were not done of adjusting for heat that could be delivered which can definitely shift circadian rhythms. We're going to talk about temperature and other things like that. So light to the eyes folks is where these light effects work in humans, in other animals, they have extra ocular photo reception in humans, no. And just be mindful, I mean, I'm not trying to encourage people to avoid certain products in particular but just be mindful of this difference between modulation and mediation. A mediating, a process through a hard wired or long-standing biological mechanism is really where you're going to see the powerful effects over time. I also, as you've probably noticed, I really tend to favor behavioral tools and zero cost tools first, and getting those dialed in before you start, plugging in and swallowing and putting things in various places just to really figure out how your biology works and explore that, unless there's of course a clinical need to take a prescribed drug in which case, by all means, listen to your doctor. Okay, a huge number of people asked me about what about light through windows? And I actually did an Instagram post about this look, setting your circadian clock with sunlight coming through a window is going to take 50 to 100 times longer. If you want the date on that, I'd be happy to send you to the various papers that were described in the previous podcast that Jamie Zeitzer from Stanford. And I have discussed also elsewhere but here's really the key thing with us. Do the experiment. You can download the free app Light Meter. You can have a bright day outside or some sunlight hold up that app, take a picture. It'll tell you how many lux now, you know what lux are. It will tell you how many lux are in that environment. Now close the window. And if you want close the screen or don't open the screen you can do all sorts of experiments. You'll see that it will at least half the amount of lux. And it doesn't scale linearly. Meaning let's say I get a 10,000 lux outside, 5,000 looking out through an open window and then I closed the window and it's 2,500 lux. It does not mean that you just need to view that sunlight for twice as long if it's half as many lux, okay? It's not like 2,500 lux means you need to look for 10 minutes and 5,000 lux means you look for five minutes. It doesn't scale that way just because the biology doesn't work that way. Best thing to do is to get outside, if you can, if you can't next best thing to do is to keep that window open. It is perfectly fine to wear prescription lenses and contacts. Why is it okay to wear prescription lenses and contacts, when those are glass also, but looking through a window, diminishes the effect. Well, we should think about this. The lenses that you wear in front of your eyes by prescription or on your eyes are designed to focus the light on to your neural retina. In fact, that's what near-sightedness is, is when the image because your lens doesn't work quite right. The image falls in front of the neural retina, wearing a particular lens in front of that focuses the lens onto your retina onto these very neurons. So they can communicate that to the brain. It's Costello is loving this light. He's deep in sleep. And if we, maybe we could play him some tones and he'll remember it later, based on the studies, we're going to talk about in a little bit. I don't know how we'd know if he remembered it or not, but prescription lenses are fine. In fact, they're great for this reason they're actually focusing the light onto the retina. So think about this logically and all of a sudden it makes perfect sense your glass window or your windshield or the side window of your car, it isn't optically perfect to bring the image and the light onto your retina. In fact, what it's doing is it's scattering and filtering light in particular the wavelengths of light that you want. So, if you live in a low light environment lots of questions about this. We talked about this, the previous podcast but just get outside for longer or, and/or use really bright lights inside. Okay, so let's think about why I'm making some of these recommendations because I think it can really empower you with the ability to change your behavior in terms of light viewing and other things, depending on time of year, depending on other lifestyle factors. The important point to understand is that early in the day, your central circadian clocks and all these mechanisms are looking for a lot of light. I mean, they don't have a mind of their own, but it needs a lot of light to trigger this daytime signal, alertness et cetera. And early in the day, but not in the middle of the day, you can sum or add photons. So there's this brief period of time early in the day, when the sun is low in the sky when your brain and body are expecting a morning wake up signal where let's say, it's not that bright outside. Someone sent me a picture or a little movie of their walk in England, and it was pretty overcast and they were using light meter and they said it's only about 700 lux or maybe even less. And I said, well, stay outside longer. But when you get inside, turn on the lights really bright and overhead lights in particular, because those will be best for stimulating these mechanisms. And that's because at least for the first few hours of the day, you can continue to some or add photon activation of the cells in the eye and the brain. In the middle of the day, once the sun is overhead, or even if you stay inside all morning, and then you're in the circadian dead zone, which sounds terrible and it is terrible. You doesn't matter if you get a ton of artificial light or even sunlight, you're not going to shift your circadian clock. You're not going to get that wake up signal. And then in the evening, you want to think about this whole system as being vulnerable to even a few photons of light because of their sensitivity to light really goes up at night. And I talked last time about how you can protect against that sensitivity by looking at the setting sun and watching the evening sun, even if it's not crossing the horizon around the time of sunset. And that's because it adjusts your retinal sensitivity and your melatonin pathway so that light is not as detrimental to melatonin at night. Think about the afternoon sunlight viewing as kind of a, I think of it as kind of a Netflix inoculation. It allows me to watch a little bit of Netflix in the evening, although it's very hard to watch a little bit of anything on Netflix. It seems like there's some other neuro-biological process that going on there where I have to watch episode after episode after episode. But in any case, you can protect yourself against some of that bad effect of light at night by looking at light in the evening. It really does adjust down the sensitivity of the system. Okay. I want to talk about seasonal changes in all these things as they relate to mood and metabolism. So depending on where you are in the world, Northern hemisphere, Southern hemisphere at the equator or closer to the poles, the days and nights are going to be different lengths. That just makes sense. But that translates to real biological signals that impact everything from wakefulness and sleep times but also mood and metabolism. So here's how this works. Now, after seeing the previous episode of the podcast and paying attention here, you are armed with the knowledge to really understand how it is that believe it or not, every cell in your body is tuned to the movement of the planet relative to the sun. So as all of you know, the earth spins once every 24 hours on its axis. So part of that day were bathed in sunlight depending on where we are the other half of the day or part of the day we're in darkness. The earth also travels around the sun 365 days is the time that it takes, one year, to travel around that sun. The earth is tilted. It's not perfectly upright. So the earth is tilted on its axis. So depending on where we are in that 365 day journey and depending on where we are in terms of hemisphere, Northern hemisphere, Southern hemisphere, some days of the year are longer than others. Some are very short, some are very long. If you're at the, at the equator you experience less variation in day length and therefore nightlife. And if you're closer to the poles, you're going to experience some very long days. And you're also going to experience some very short days depending on which poll you're at and what time of year it is. The simple way to put this as depending on time of year the days are either getting shorter or getting longer. Now, every cell in your body adjusts its biology according to day length, except your brain, body and cells don't actually know anything about day length. It only knows night length. And here's how it works. Light inhibits melatonin powerfully. If days are long and getting longer, that means melatonin is reduced. The total amount of melatonin is less because light is more, therefore melatonin is less. If days are getting shorter, light can't inhibit melatonin as much, through the summing of photon mechanisms that we talked about before, and that melatonin signal is getting longer. So every cell in your body actually knows external day length and therefore time of year by way of the duration of the melatonin signal. And in general, it's fair to say that in diurnal animals, meaning animals like us that tend to be awake during the daytime and not nocturnal animals, which tend to be awake at night. The longer the melatonin signal, the more depressed not necessarily clinically depressed, although that can happen but the more depressed our systems tend to be. Reproduction, metabolism, mood, turnover rates of skin cells and hair cells all tend to be diminished compared to the spring and summer months for some Northern hemisphere, spring and summer months, or the times in which days are very long. And there's less melatonin that tends to, in almost all animals, including humans, more breeding, more hormone elevation of the hormones that stimulate breeding reproduction and fertility metabolism is up, lipid metabolism fat-burning is up, protein synthesis is up. These things tend to correlate with the seasons. Now, some people are very, very strongly tied to the seasons. They get depressed, clinically depressed in winter and light therapies are very useful for those people. Some people love the winter and they're happiest in winter and they feel kind of depressed in summer. Although that is far more rare. That doesn't mean depression cannot exist in the summer, but when we're talking about seasonal depression that tends to be true. It's more depression in winter. Now there's other things that correlate with seasonality. Suicide rates tend to be highest in the spring not in the winter, but that has to do with some of the more complicated and unfortunately tragic aspects of suicide which is that oftentimes people will commit suicide not at the very depths of their energy levels, but as they're emerging from those depths of low energy. So we'll talk about suicidality and mood disorders in a later podcast season, meaning a month later. But for now, just understand that everybody is going through these natural fluctuations depending on the duration of the melatonin signal. Now this might lead you to say, "Well, then I should just really get as much light as I can all the time and reduce melatonin feel great all the time." Unfortunately, doesn't work that way because melatonin also has important effects on the immune system. It has important effects on transmitter systems in the brain, et cetera. So everybody needs to figure out for themselves how much light they need early in the day and how much light they need to avoid late in the day, in order to optimize their mood and metabolism. There is no one size fits all prescription because there's a range of melatonin receptors, there are a range of everything from metabolic types to genetic histories, family histories, et cetera. There is no one size fits all prescription but by understanding that light and extended day length inhibit melatonin and melatonin tends to be associated with a more depressed or reduced functioning of these kinds of activity driving and mood elevating signals, and understanding that you have some control over melatonin by way of light, including sunlight but also artificial light, and that should empower you I believe, to make the adjustments that if you're feeling low you might ask, how much light am I getting? What am I getting that light? Because sleep is also important for restoring mood, right? So you need sleep. You can't just, just crush melatonin across the board and expect to feel good because then you're not going to fall asleep and stay asleep. Melatonin, not incidentally comes from, is synthesized from serotonin. Serotonin is a neurotransmitter that is associated with feelings of well-being provided to proper levels, but well-being of a particular kind. Well-being associated with quiescence and calm and the feeling that we have enough resources in our immediate kind of conditions. Is the kind of thing that comes from a good meal or sitting down with friends or holding a loved one, or conversing with somebody that you really bond with. Serotonin does not stimulate action. It tends to stimulate stillness. Very different than the neuromodulator dopamine which is a reward feel good neuromodulator that stimulates action. And actually dopamine is the cursor to epinephrin, to adrenaline which actually puts us into action. There it's actually made from dopamine, right? So, you can start to think how about light as a signal that is very powerful for modulating things like sleep and wakefulness but also serotonin levels, melatonin levels. And I talked about this previously but I'll mention once more, that light in the middle of the night reduces dopamine levels to the point where it can start causing problems with learning and memory and mood. That's one powerful reason to void bright light in the middle of the night. Okay. Seasonal rhythms have a number of effects but humans are not purely seasonal breeders. Unlike a lot of animals, we breed all year long. In fact, there's a preponderance of September babies in my life, not actual babies, because they're born in September which means that they were conceived in December, without knowing the details we can fairly assume that. And December, at least in the Northern hemisphere at days tend to be shorter and nights tend to be longer. So clearly humans aren't seasonal breeders but there are shifts in breeding and fertility that exist in humans, but also much more strongly in other animals. So seasonal effects vary. Some of you will experience very strong seasonal effects others of you will not. I think everybody should be taking care to get adequate sunlight and to avoid bright light at night throughout the year if possible. Throughout this podcast and in previous episodes, I've been mentioning neuromodulators, things like serotonin and dopamine which tend to buy a certain brain circuits and things in our body to happen in certain brain circuits and things in our body not to happen. One of the ones I've mentioned numerous times is epinephrin which is a neuromodulator that tends to put us into action, make us want to move. In fact, when it's released in high amounts in our brain and body, it can lead to what we call stress or the feeling of being stressed. Several people ask me, what's the difference between epinephrin and adrenaline. Adrenaline is secreted from the adrenal glands which sit right above our kidneys. Epinephrin is the exact same molecule except that it's released within the brain. And so people use these phrases or these words rather interchangeably, epi means near or on top of sometimes and neph, neph Anytime you see nephron or ph it means kidney. So it means near the kidney. So epinephrin actually means near the kidney. So it was used originally to describe adrenaline, but epinephrin and adrenaline are basically the same thing and they tend to stimulate agitation and the desire to move. That's what that's about. Which brings us to the topic of exercise. Got a lot of questions about exercise. What forms of exercise are best for sleeping well? When should I exercise et cetera. There's a lot of them individual variability around this, but I can talk about what I know from the science literature and what I happened to do myself. There are basically two forms of exercise that we can talk about although, of course I realize there are many different forms of exercise. There's much more nuance to this, but we can talk about cardiovascular exercise, where the idea is to repeat a movement over and over and over continuously. So that'd be like running, biking, rowing and cycling this kind of thing. Or there's a resistance exercise where you're moving, lifting, presumably putting down also things of progressively heavier and heavier weight that you couldn't do continuously for 30 minutes. So cardiovascular exercise is typically the more aerobic type exercise and resistance exercise of course is the more anaerobic type exercise. And yes, there's variation between the two. Most studies of exercise have looked at aerobic exercise because that's basically the thing that you can get a rat or a mouse to do. You know what's really weird about rats and mice, they like to run on wheels so much, that someone actually did this study, it was published in science they put a wheel, a running wheel in the middle of a field and mice ran to that wheel and ran on the wheel. They turns out that what they like is the passage of the visual image of the bars in front of their face, which I find kind of remarkable and troubling because it seems so like trivial, but anyway they love aerobic exercise. And so most of the studies were done on these mice that love running on wheels. Whereas so far as it's been challenging to find conditions in which mice really liked to lift weights or we'll do it in a laboratory. So any weight bearing exercise studies really have to be done in humans. And since humans are what we're interested in, there are some studies looking at these two things and when they tend to work best. Now you will see some places aerobic exercise is best done in the morning and weight training is best done in the afternoon. I think there's far more individual variation than that. I think there are however, a couple of windows that the exercise science literature and the circadian literature points to as windows related to body temperature in which performance, injury, in which performance is optimized injury is reduced and so on. And those tend to be 30 minutes after waking. And that probably correlates with the inflection in cortisol associated with waking whether or not you've gotten light or not, three hours after waking, which probably correlates to the rise in body temperature sometime right around waking. And the later afternoon, usually 11 hours after waking which is when temperature tends to peak. So some people like to exercise in the morning. Some people like to exercise in the afternoon. It really depends. I think for those of us with very busy schedules, it's advantageous to be able to do your training whenever you have the opportunity to do it, unless you can really control your schedule. And so I would never want these recommendations to seem like recommendations, what I'm really describing are some opportunities, 30 minutes after waking, three hours after waking or 11 hours after waking has been shown at least in some studies to optimize performance, reduce injury and that sort of thing. But you really have to figure out what works for you. A note about working out first thing in the morning. Last time we talked about non-photo phase shifts. If you exercise first thing in the morning, your body will start to develop an anticipatory circuit. There's actually plasticity in these circadian circuits that will lead you to want to wake up at the particular time that you exercised the previous three or four days. So that can be a powerful tool but you still want to get light exposure. Because it turns out that light and exercise converged, so giving even bigger, wake up signal to the brain and body. So you might want to think about that. Some people find if they exercise late in the day they have trouble sleeping in general intense exercise does that, whereas the kind of lower intensity exercise doesn't. I found some interesting literature that talked about sleep need and exercise. I found this fascinating that if one is waking not feeling rested and recovered from and yet sleeping the same amount that they typically have, it's quite possible that the intensity of exercise in the proceeding two or three days is too high. Whereas if one can't recover no matter how much sleep they get, they're just sleepy all the time, I realized these things are correlated that the volume of training might be too high. Now I'm not an exercise scientist. We should probably get Andy Galpin or somebody else on here, who's really an expert in this kind of stuff. I do realize as soon as anyone talks about exercise or nutrition publicly, they're basically opening themselves up to all sorts of challenges because you can basically find support for almost any protocol in the literature. What I've looked at was two journals in particular, International Journal Chronobiology and journal Biological Rhythms. Excuse me, to assess these parameters that I I've mentioned just just a moment ago because the studies tended to be done in humans. They were fairly recent and they came from groups that I recognized as well as knowing that those journals are peer reviewed. Many of your questions were about neural plasticity which is the brain and nervous system's ability to change in response to experience. There was a question that asked whether or not these really deep biological mechanisms around wakefulness, time of waking sleep, et cetera were subject to neuroplasticity and indeed they are. Some of that plasticity is short-term and some of it is more long-term. There's a really good analogy here which is, if you happen to eat on a very tight schedule where every day say it 8:00 AM, noon and 7:00 PM is when you eat your food not suggesting you do this but let's say you were to do that for a couple of days. After a few days, you would start to anticipate those meal times where no matter where you were in the world, no matter what was going on in your life about five to 10 minutes before those meal times, you would start to feel hungry and even a little agitated, which is your body's way of trying to get you to forage for food. And that's because of some peptide signals that come from the periphery from your body, things like hypocretin norexin that signal to the hypothalamus and brainstem to make you active and alert and look for food and feel hungry. So there's kind of an anticipatory circuit, that's a chemical circuit, but eventually over time, the neurons, the neural circuits that control hypocretin orexin would get tuned to the neural circuits that are involved in eating and maybe even smell and taste to create a kind of eating circuit that's unique to your pattern, to your rhythms. The same thing is true for these waking and exercise and other schedules, including all trade-in schedules. If you wake up in the morning and start getting your sunlight, you start exercising in the morning or you exercise in the afternoon, pretty soon, your body will start to anticipate that and start to secrete hormones and other signals that prepare your body for the ensuing activity of waking up or going to sleep. So if you get onto a pattern or a rhythm, even if that rhythm isn't down to the minute, you'll find that there's plasticity in these circuits and it becomes easier to wake up early. If that's your thing or exercise at a particular day if that's your thing. That's the beauty of neuroplasticity. A number of people ask, "What can I do to increase plasticity?" And that really comes in two forms. There's plasticity that we can access in sleep to improve rates of learning and depth of learning from the previous day or so. And there's this an SDR non-sleep deep breaths that can be done without sleeping, to improve rates of learning and depth of retention, et cetera. So let's consider those both and you can incorporate these protocols if you like. Again, these are based on quality peer reviewed studies. First, let's talk about learning in sleep. This is based on some work that I'll provide the reference for that was published in the journal Science. Excellent journal, Matt Walker also talks about some of these studies done by others in his book "Why We Sleep". The studies just to remind you are structured in he following way an individual is brought into a laboratory, Lowe does a spatial memory task. So there tends to be a screen with a bunch of different objects popping up on the screen in different locations. So it might be a Bulldog's face that might be a cat, and it might be an Apple than it might be a pen in different locations. And that sounds trivial easy but with time you can imagine it gets pretty tough to come back a day later and remember, if something presented in a given location was something you've seen before and whether or not it was presented in that location or a different location. If you had enough objects and changed locations enough, this can actually be quite difficult. In this study, the subjects either just went through the experiment or a particular odor was released into the room while they were learning or a tone was played in the room while they were learning. And then during the sleep of those subjects the following night and the following night, so this was done repeatedly for several nights, the same odor or tone was played while the subjects were sleeping. They did this in different stages of sleep non-REM sleep and rapid eye movement, sleep REM sleep. They did this with just the tone in sleep. If the subjects had the odor but not the tone, they did it with putting the tone, if they had had the odor while learning. So basically all the controls, all the things you'd want to see done to make sure that it wasn't some indirect effects, a modulatory effect. Okay. And what they found was that providing the same stimulus, the odor, if they smelled an odor or a tone if the subjects heard a tone while learning if they just delivered that odor or tone while the subject slept, rates of learning and retention of information was significantly greater. This is pretty cool. What this means that you can cue the subconscious brain, and the asleep brain to learn particular things better and faster. So how might you implement this? Well, you could play with this if you want. I don't see any real challenge to this provided the odor and is a safe one and then doesn't wake you up and the tone is a safe one, and doesn't wake you up. You could do this by having a metronome, for instance, while I'm learning something, playing in the background or particular music and then have that very faintly while you sleep. So you could apply this if you like and try this. There are a number of groups I think now that are trying this using tactile stimulation. So slight vibration on the wrist during learning and then the same vibration on the wrist during sleep. It does not appear that the sensory modality, whether or not it's odor or auditory tone or tactile stimulation, some as a sensory stimulation, whether or not it matters. It's remarkable because it really shows that sleep is an extension of the waking state. We've known that for a long time but this really tethers those two in a very meaningful and actionable way. So I think I'll report back to you as I learned more about these studies, but that's what I know about them at this point. As long as we're there we might as well talk about dreaming 'cause I got so many questions about dreams. A couple of you, we want to ask me what their dreams meant. Look, I don't even know what my dreams mean half the time. I occasionally will wake up from a dream and remember it. If you want to remember your dreams better, if you're somebody who has challenges remembering your dreams, you can set your alarms that you wake up in the middle of this one of these 90 minute cycles which toward morning tend to be occupied almost exclusively by REM sleep. Remember early in the night, you have less REM sleep than later in the night. But you want to get as much sleep as you can 'cause that's healthy. So I don't know that you want to wake yourself up. Some people find that writing down their thoughts immediately first thing in the morning allows them to relater spontaneously remember their dream they had. There's some literature on that. The meaning of dreams is a little bit controversial. Some people believe they have strong meaning other people believe that they can be just spontaneous firing of neurons that were active in the waking state and don't have any meaning. There are good data to show that when you learn spatial, new spatial environments that there's a replay of those environments, so-called place cells that fire in your brain only when you enter a particular environment, that those are replayed in sleep in almost direct fashion to the way that things were activated when you were learning that spatial task. Dreams are fascinating, they're were paralyzed during dreams which brings us to another question. Somebody asked about sleep paralysis. We are paralyzed for much of our sleep, so-called atonia so presumably so we don't act out our dreams. Some people wake up and they're still paralyzed. I've actually had this happen to me not very many times, but a few times. And then they jolt themselves awake and it actually is quite terrifying. I can say from personal experience to wake up be wide awake and you cannot move your body at all. It's really quite frightening. There are a couple of things that will increase the intrusion of atonia into the wakeful state which is essentially means you're waking up but you can't, you can't move. One is marijuana, THC, a I'm not a marijuana smoker. I'm not a copper. I don't know the legality where you live. So I'm not saying one thing or another about marijuana. I'm just, the fact that I had that experience without marijuana means that it can happen regardless, but marijuana smokers, for whatever reason maybe it has something to do with the cannabinoid receptors or the serotonin receptors downstream of the motor pathways. I don't know. I couldn't find any literature on this but marijuana smokers report, higher frequency of this kind of paralysis and wakefulness as you transition from sleep to wakefulness. I suppose probably one could learn to get comfortable with it. For me, it was terrifying, 'cause I'm just used to being able to move my limbs fortunately and I wasn't able to, and it's a quite a thing, let me tell you, okay. some other questions about neuroplasticity. So the other form of neuroplasticity is not the neuroplasticity that you're amplifying by listening to tones or smelling odors in sleep, but the neuroplasticity that you can access with non sleep deep rest. So NSDR, non sleep deep rest as well as short 20 minute naps, which are very close to non sleep deep rest because people rarely drop into deep States of sleep during short naps, unless they're very sleep deprived. NSDR has been shown to increase rates of learning when done for 20 minute bouts for a proxy- to match an approximately 90 minute about of learning. So what am I talking about? 90 minute cycles are these ultradian cycles that I've talked about previously. And we tend to learn very well by taking a 90 minute cycle transitioning into some focus mode early in the cycle, and it's hard to focus and then deep focus and learning feels almost like agitation and strain and then by the end of that 90 minute cycle, it becomes very hard to maintain focus and learn more information. There's a study published in Cell Reports last year. Great journal, excellent paper showing that 20 minute naps or light sleep of a sort of non sleep deep rest taken immediately after or close to it, doesn't have to be immediately after you finished the last sentence of learning or whatever it is, or bar of music. But you know, a couple of minutes after transitioning to a period of non sleep deep rest, where you're turning off the analysis of duration path and outcome has been shown to accelerate learning to a significant degree. Both the amount of information and the retention of that information. So that's pretty cool, because this is a cost-free, drug-free way of accelerating learning without having to get more sleep. But simply by introducing these 20 minute bouts. I would encourage people if they want to try this to consider the 20 minutes per every 90 minutes of ultradian learning cycle, there you're incorporating a number of different neuroscience backed tools 90 minute cycles for focused learning. It could be motor, it could be cognitive, it could be musical, whatever, and then transitioned to a 20 minute non sleep deep rest protocol. I just want to cue you the fact that in last` episode in the caption on YouTube, we provided links to two different yoga nidra, non sleep deep rest protocols as well as hypnosis protocols that are clinically backed from my colleague David Spiegel at Stanford Psychiatry Department. All those resources are free. There are also a lot of other hypnosis scripts out there. I like the ones from Michael Sealey S-E-A-L, I think it's E-Y, maybe it's just L-Y, you can find them easily on YouTube, clinical hypnosis scripts meaning not stage hypnosis. They're not designed to get you to do anything. In fact they're just designed to help rewire your brain circuitry. Now, how does hypnosis work that way? This has a lot to do with sleep because it engages neuro-plasticity by bringing together two things that normally are separate from one another, one is the alert focused wakeful state where you activate the learning. And then there's the deep rest where the actual reconfiguration of the neurons and synopsis takes place. Hypnosis brings both the focus and the deep rest component into the same compartment of time. It's a very unique state in that way. So hypnosis kind of maximizes the learning about and the non sleep deep breasts bow and combines them. But of course that requires some guidance from a script or from a hypnotist clinically, a trained hypnotist and it becomes hard to acquire detailed information. It's more about shifts in state, like fear to states of calm or smoking to quitting smoking, anxiety around a trauma to release of anxiety around a trauma rather than specific information learned in hypnosis, okay? So hypnosis seems more about modulating the circuits that underlie state as opposed to specific information. Although I would not be surprised if there weren't certain forms of hypnosis that could increase retention and learning of specific information, but I'm not aware of any of those protocols out there yet. Which brings us to the next thing about learning and plasticity which is nootropics, AKA smart drugs. [sighs] This is a big topic that sigh was a sigh of concern about how to address nootropics in a thorough enough, but thoughtful enough way. Look, I have a lot of thoughts about nootropics. First of all, it means smart drugs, I believe. And I don't like that phrase because let's just take a step back and think about exercise. You just say, I want to be more physically fit. What does that mean? Does it mean I would ask for more specificity, I'd say, Do you want to be stronger? Okay, maybe you need to lift heavier objects progressively. Do you want more endurance very different protocol to access endurance. Do you want flexibility? Do you want explosiveness or suppleness? Huge range of things that we call physical fitness. Maybe you want all of those. If we were talking about emotional fitness we would say, well, inability to feel empathy but probably also to disengage from empathy because you don't want to be tethered to other people's emotions all the time. That's not healthy either. You would think about being able to access a range of emotions, but for some people their range into the sadness regime is really quite vast but their range into the happiness regime might be kind of limited. For other people who are in a manic state, it might be, they can access all that happy stuff but not the sadder stuff. So I'm speaking by way of analogy here. But if we say we're talking about cognitive and cognitive abilities we have to ask, okay, creativity, memory. We tend to associate intelligence with memory. And I think this goes back to like spelling bees or something, the ability to retain a lot of information and just regurgitate information which will get you some distance in some disciplines of life. But it won't allow you creative thinking, it's necessary for creative thinking. You need a knowledge base, right? You can't just look up everything on Google, despite what you know, certain educators or so-called educators say, you need a database so that you can have the raw materials with which to be creative. So necessary to have memory but not sufficient to be creative, right? The creative could have a poor memory for certain things but certainly not for everything. They can't have anterograde and retrograde amnesia. They'd be like the goldfish that every time around the tank, it, you know I can't remember where it's at. I actually don't know that they've ever done that experiment by the way, but you know, so no disrespect to goldfish but you know, so you get the idea. You've got creativity, you have memory, you have the ability to task switch, right? You have the ability to strategy development, strategy implement. So the problem I have with the concept of a nootropic or a smart drug is it's not specific as to what cognitive algorithm you're trying to engage. We need more specificity. That said, there are elements to learning that we've discussed here before that are very concrete things like the ability to focus and put the blinders on to everything else that's happening in around you and in your head mainly, right? Distractions about things you should be doing, could be doing or might be doing and focus on what you need to do. And then that's required for triggering the acetylcholine neuromodulator that will then allow you to highlight the particular synopsis that will then later change in sleep. So no nootropic allows you to bypass the need for sleep in deep rest. That's important to understand. So I daydream about a day when people will be able to access compounds that are safe, that will allow them to learn better meaning, to access information, focus better, as well as to sleep better and activate the plasticity from the learning about. Right now most nootropics tend to bundle a bunch of things together. Most of them include some form of stimulant, caffeine. Episode two, I'll tell you more probably than you ever wanted to know about caffeine, adenosine and how that works. So refer there for how caffeine works. But stimulants will allow you to increase focus up to a particular point. If you have too little alertness in your system, you can't focus, too much however, you start to cliff and focus drifts, okay? So you can't just ingest more stimulant to be more focused. It doesn't work that way. Most nootropics also include things that increase or a desire to increase acetylcholine. Things like alpha GPC and other things of that sort. And indeed, there's some evidence that they can increase acetylcholine. I refer you again to examine.com the website to evaluate any supplements or compounds for their safety and their effects in humans and animals, free website as well as with links to studies. So we need the focus component. We need the alertness component. The alertness component comes from epinephrin, traditionally from caffeine stimulation. The acetylcholine stimulation traditionally comes from Coleen donors or alpha GPC, things of that sort. And then you would want to have some sort of off switch, because anything that's going to really stimulate your alertness, that then provides a crash. That crash is not a crash into the deep kind of restful slumber that you would want for learning, it's a crash into the kind of, let's just call it lopsided sleep, meaning it's deep sleep but it lacks certain spindles and other elements of the physiology sleep spindles, that really engage the learning process and the reconfiguration of synopsis. So right now, my stance on nootropics is that maybe, maybe for occasional use, provided it's safe for you, I'm not recommending it, but in general it tends to use more of a shotgun approach than is probably going to be useful for learning and memory in the long run. A lot of people ask about Modafinil or armodafinil which was designed for treatment of narcolepsy. So right there, it tells you it's a stimulant. And yes, there is evidence, it will improve learning memory. Modafinil is very expensive. Last time I checked our Modafinil I think is the recent released a generic version of this that's far less expensive. Most of these things look a lot like amphetamine and many of them have the potential for addiction or can be habit forming. But more importantly, a lot of those things also can create metabolic effects by disruption to insulin receptors and so forth. So you want to approach those with a strong sense of caution. Now, there are the milder things that act as nootropics that I mentioned, some of them like alpha GPC. Some people like Gingko. Gingko gives me vicious headaches, so I don't take it. So people really differ. Last podcast, I recommend magnesium threonate if you were exploring supplements I'm not recommending anything directly. I'm just saying if you're exploring supplements, magnesium threonate seems among the magnesiums to be one of the more bioavailable and useful for sleep. I recommended it actually to a good friend of mine, it gave him at very low dose, he had stomach issues with it. He just had to simply stop taking it. So there's variability there. You just, it gave him some stomach cramping and just didn't feel good on it. Stopped it, he felt better. Other people take magnesium threonate and feel great. I was asked, do magnesium need to be taken with or without food or before sleep? If you're going to go that route it should be taken 30 to 60 minutes before sleep, 'cause it's designed to make you sleepy. And I'm not aware that it has to be taken with food, but again all of this has to be run by your doctor and this is your healthcare to govern not, these are not strict recommendations so look into it. But magnesium threonate, most people I recommend it to have benefit from it tremendously. Some people can't tolerate it, so you have to find out. There were a number of questions about other supplements designed to access deep sleep, in part to access neuroplasticity, but now I'm just sort of transitioning from neuroplasticity to these compounds that can regulate sleep. One of them that I discussed at the end of the last podcast, I got a lot of questions about is apigenin A-P-I-G-E-N-I-N, apigenin. If you will look in the literature the way it works is it increases some of the enzymes associated with GABA metabolism. It actually, GABA's an inhibitory neurotransmitter. It's the neurotransmitter that is increased after a couple alcohol drinks containing alcohol. And that shut down the forebrain. Apigenin is a derivative of the camomile. I think that the proper pronunciation of this is metric caria kemo mila. Although I always feel like I should be using a Spanish accent. Whenever I say something like that other related things that impact the GABA system and increase GABA or things like passion flower which is [speaks in foreign language]. [chuckles] I don't know why the Italian, is that Italian. Anyway, my Italian colleagues, please forgive me. I have some very close Italian friends and colleagues in Genoa. I butchered the Italian, sorry. In any event apigenin and passion flower found in a lot of, a lot of supplements designed to increase sleepiness and sleep because, and they work presumably because they increase GABA. Actually they work on chloride channels rather than give you a whole lecture on membrane biophysics in neurons. I'll just say that when neurons are really active it's because sodium ions, salt rushes into the cells and causes them to fire electrically. The cells tend to become less active as more chloride which is a negatively charged ion. This is probably taking some of you back to the either the wonderful times or traumas of high school physics. The chloride is negatively charged so, it tends to make cells less electrically positive, 'cause carries a negative charge and hyperpolarizes the neuron. So apigenin works through these increasing the activity of these chloride channels. Passionflower works by increasing the activity of these chloride channels and GABA transmission. It tends to increase this inhibitory neurotransmitter that shuts off our thinking our analysis of duration path and outcome. So if you're going to explore these things I suggest you at least know how they work. You at least go to examined.com that you talked to your doctor about them. Some people asked about serotonin for getting to sleep and staying asleep. Now I understand the rationale here. Just like I understand the rationale of taking something like Macuna Purina or L-DOPA to increase dopamine but sometimes what works on paper doesn't really work in the real world. I personally have tried taking a supplement which was Al tryptophan, which is the precursor to serotonin or five HTP, which is designed to increase, it is serotonin basically. You're just a one biochemical step away from actually taking actual serotonin. And I'll be honest the sleep that I had with increased serotonin by way of tryptophan or five HTP was dreadful. I fell asleep almost immediately. You say, well, that's great. And 90 minutes later, I woke up and I couldn't sleep almost for 48 hours. Now that was me, I have a pretty sensitive system to certain things and not to other things. Some people love these things. So you really have to be thoughtful and explore them with that kind of awareness of being thoughtful and realizing that what works for you might not work for everybody and what works for everybody might not work for you. Okay? I'd like to continue by talking about the role of temperature in sleep, accessing sleep, staying asleep and wakefulness. But first I want to tell a joke. Because I think this joke really captures some of the critical things to understand about any self-experimentation that you might do. So this is a story that was told to me by a colleague of mine who's now a professor of Caltech not to be named. So there's a scientist and they're in their lab. And they're trying to understand how the nervous system works. So they go over to a tank and they pick up a frog, and they take the frog and they put it down on the table And they clap. [claps] And the frog jumps. So they think for awhile, they pick up the frog, okay. They go over to the cabinet and they take out a little bit of a paralytic drug and they inject it locally into the back leg, set it down and clap. [claps] And the frog jumps, but it kind of like jumps to the side a little bit. They pick it up, they inject the paralytic into the other back leg. They clap again, the frog jumps, but it really doesn't jump well that time, it kind of drags itself forward. So they pick it up and they inject the paralytic into the remaining two legs. They set it down and they clap and the frog doesn't jump. And they go, "Oh my goodness! The legs are used for hearing." Now they publish the paper. Paper comes out in a great journal, news releases. It's a really big deal, their career takes off. 20 years later, a really smart graduate student comes along and says, "Yeah but that's loss of function. It doesn't really show gain of function." So let's take a closer look. So they repeat the first experiment and checks out, everything happens the same way, but then they take the frog and they inject a drug into all four legs that turns off the paralytic, right? It's an antagonist. They set the frog down, they clap, and the frog jumps and they go, "Oh my goodness! It's true. The legs really are for hearing." Now, first of all, I want to make the point that this is not to illustrate that science is not a good practice, it is. We need to do loss of function and gain and function experiments. But just to show that correlation and causation is complicated. You need to do a variety of control experiments, and you really need to figure out what works for you. And so while science can provide answers about what works under very controlled conditions, it doesn't and can never address all the situations in which a given compound, a given practice will or won't work. And it's not just individual variability is that there are a number of different factors. You all of course know that light can activate and shift your circadian rhythm, but so can exercise, so can food. The last point I want to make is an important one, which is that no frogs were hurt in the telling of this joke. Okay. So let's continue. I want to talk about temperature. Temperature is super interesting as it relates to circadian rhythms and wakefulness and sleep. First let's take a look at what's happening to our body temperature across each 24-hour cycle. In general, our temperature tends to be lowest right around 4:00 AM and starts creeping up around 6:00 AM, 8:00 AM and peaks sometime between 4:00 PM and 6:00 PM. Now that varies from person to person, but in general if we were to continuously monitor or occasionally monitor temperature that's what we would see. Now what's interesting is that even in the absence of any light cues or meal cues, we would have a shift. We would have an oscillation or a rhythm in our temperature. They would go from high to low. This is why the idea that we're all 96.8 and that's our correct temperature. Forget that. That is no longer true. It never was true. It depends on what time of day you measure temperature. However, there is a range which is within normal range, I think most of us associate fever with somewhere around 100, 101 103, that's concerning. And we will be very concerned if temperature drop too low as well. The way that the temperature rhythm that's indogenous, that's within us and rhythmic no matter what, the way it gets anchored to the pattern I described before, or being lowest at 4:00 AM and increasing again around, through the day until about four to 6:00 PM is by way of entrainment or matching to some external cue, which is almost always going to be light, but also exercise. Now you may have experienced this temperature rhythm and how quickly it can become uninterested or it can fall out of entrainment. Here's an experiment I wouldn't want you to do but you've probably experienced this before, where you wake up, it's sunny outside, and maybe you have some email or some things to take care of or maybe you didn't sleep that well the night before and so you stay in doors. You don't change anything about your breakfast, you don't change anything about your within home temperature or anything like that. And somewhere right around 10 or 11 o'clock you start feeling kind of chilled, like you're cold. Well, what happened was the oscillators, the clocks in your various tissues that are governed by temperature and circadian rhythm are starting to split away from your central clock mechanisms. So it's actually important that your temperature match day length. Now there's another way in which temperature matches, oh daytime, excuse me. There's also an important way in which temperature matches day length in general as days get longer, it tends to be hotter out. Not always, but in general, that's the way it is. And as days get shorter, it tends to be colder outside. So temperature and day length are also linked metabolically. They're linked biologically they're linked, excuse me, and atmospherically they're linked for the reason that we talked about before about duration of day length and other climate features and so forth. So one of the most powerful things about setting your circadian rhythm properly is that your temperature will start to fall into a regular rhythm. And that temperature has a very strong effect on things like metabolism and when you will feel most willing and interested in exercising, typically the willingness to exercise and engage in any kind of activity mental or physical is going to be when that rise in temperature is steepest. When the slope of that line is greatest. That's why 30 minutes after waking is one of those key windows, as well as three hours after waking. And then when temperature actually peaks which is generally, generally about 11 hours after waking. So this is why we say that temperature and circadian rhythm are linked but they're actually even more linked than that. We've talked before about how light enters the eye, triggers activation of these melanopsin cells, which then triggers activation of the super charismatic nucleus, the master circadian clock. And then I always say the master circadian clock informs all the cells and tissues of your body and puts them into a nice cohesive rhythm. But what I've never answered was how it actually puts them into that rhythm. And it does it two ways. One is it secretes a peptide. And peptide is just a little protein that floats through the bloodstream and signals to the cells. Okay, we're tuning your clock. Kind of like a little, we know watch store, the watch store owner would tune the clocks. But the other way is it synchronizes the temperature under which those cells exist. So temperature is actually the effector of the circadian rhythm. Now this is really important because changes in temperature by way of exercise, by way of eating, but especially by way of exercise can start to shift our circadian rhythm pretty dramatically. But let's even go to in a more extreme example. Nowadays, there's some interest in cold showers and ice baths, not everybody is doing this I realize. People seem to either love this or hate this. I don't mind the cold dunk thing. I get regular about this from time to time and I'll do it. I haven't been doing it recently. It's always painful to do the first couple of times then you get kind of used to it. However, I've taken people to a cold, dunk or an ice bath. I have a family member who wouldn't get in literally passed her toes. She was like, this is just too aversive for me. Some people really like the cold, people very tremendously. Getting into an ice bath is very interesting because you have a rebound increase in thermogenesis. Now you should know from the previous episode that as that temperature increases, it will shift your circadian rhythm and which direction it shifts your circadian rhythm will depend on whether or not you're doing it during the daytime or late in the day. If you do it after 8:00 PM, it's going to make your day longer, right? Because your body and your central clocks are used to temperature going up early in the day and throughout the day and peaking in the afternoon. If you then increase that further or you simply increase it over its baseline at 8:00 PM after temperature was already falling, even if it's just by a half a degree or a couple of degrees or you do that with exercise doesn't have to be with the ice bath, you are extending, you are shifting forward your phase, delaying your clock. You're convincing your clock and therefore the rest of your body that the day is still going, right? You you're giving it the perception, the cellar and physiological perception that the day is getting longer. And you will want to naturally stay up later and wake up later. Now you might say, "Wait I do an ice bath late at night, and I feel great. And I fall deeply asleep." Well, cold can trigger the release of melatonin. There's a rebound increase in melatonin. So that could be the cause of that effect. You have to see what works for you, but if you do the ice bath early in the day and then get out you will experience a more rapid rise or cold shower early in the day, a more rapid rise in your body temperature that will phase advance your clock and make it easier to get up early the following day. So for those of you that are having trouble getting up and this is going to almost sound laughable but a cold shower first thing in the morning will wake you up, but that's waking you up in the short term because of a different mechanism which I'll talk about in a moment, but it also is shifting your clock, it's phase advancing your clock in a way that makes you more likely to get up earlier the next day, okay? So in other words, increasing your temperature by getting in an ice bath or cold shower or exercising which causes a compensatory increase in body temperature. Think about the normal pattern of body temperature. Low around 4:35 AM starts to peak right around waking start, excuse me, starts to increase right around waking then steep slope, steep slope to a peak around four to 6:00 PM and then drops off. If you introduce an increase in body temperature by way of cold exposure early in the day, let's say 6:00 AM or 5:00 AM if you're masochistic enough to get into a cold shower at that time more power to you, it's going to make, you want to wake up about half hour to an hour earlier the next day than you normally would. Whereas if you do it while your temperature is falling, it will tend to delay and make your body perceive as if the day is getting longer. These are phase advances and phase delays. We're going to get into this in far more detail when we talk about jet lag and shift work in episode four as well as other other things. But temperature is, again is not just one tool to manipulate wake up time and circadian rhythm and metabolism. It is the effector. It is the way that the central circadian clock impacts all the cells and tissues of your body. If you want to read further about this and you're really curious about the role of temperature work by Joe Takahashi who used to be at Northwestern University and is now at UT Southwestern in Dallas, incredible scientist and has really worked out a lot of the mechanisms around temperature in circadian rhythms. You can just Google his name and you'll see a whole bunch of studies there. I want to talk about cold and cold exposure because there's a great misconception about this that actually you can leverage once you understand how to use cold to either increase thermogenesis and fat loss, metabolism, or you can use it for stress, mitigation and mood. And it really depends on one simple feature of how you approach the ice bath or cold shower. If you get into an ice bath or cold shower and you are calming yourself you're actively calming the autonomic nervous system. Maybe through some deep breathing, maybe through visualization, maybe you sing a song. You know, people do this stuff. They use various tools. Some people find paying attention to an external stimulus is more helpful. You know, thinking about something not the experience of the cold, other people find that directly experiencing the cold in its most intense form and kind of "going into the cold" is the best way to approach it. It really varies for people. There's no right or wrong way to go about this. But the goal of using cold exposure for stress inoculation and to raise your stress threshold to be able to tolerate heightened levels of real life stress, not the ice bath, but real life stress like work stress and relational stress, et cetera is by suppressing the activation of the so-called sympathetic nervous system, meaning the alertness or stress system. That involves buffering or trying to resist the shiver response. The shiver response is an autonomic response designed to generate heat, presumably, and actually that is what it does in order to counter the cold. So when you use cold exposure and you're kind of muscling through it, or you're learning to relax within it as a form of stress inoculation, that's great and works quite well for that purpose. And there's a reason why cold exposure is used in a variety of forms of military stress inoculation, most famous of which of course is the Navy seal buds, a strep test really, which is screening procedure for becoming a seal involves a lot of exposure to cold water. However, if you're interested in using cold exposure for fat loss and thermogenesis, you want to do the exact opposite thing. There was a paper published in nature two years ago which showed that cold induced shiver, the actual physical shiver activates the release of a chemical in the body from muscle called succinate S-U-C-C-I-N-A-T-E. Succinate travel in the bloodstream and then goes and activates a particular category of fat not the typical kind pink or white fat that we think of is like blubber in humans. That the stuff that people will seem to generally want less of, except for those genetic freaks that seem to have none of it depending what they consume. Congratulations. Brown fat is called Brown fat because it's actually dark under the microscope. It's rich with mitochondria and it exists mostly between the scapulae and in the upper neck. And it generates thermogenesis and heat in the body. It's rich with a certain category of agile anergic receptor, in insanely epinephrin binds to adrenergic receptors. These Brown fat cells increase metabolism, it's called Brown fat thermogenesis and cause fat burning, burning of other kinds of fat, the pink and white fat. So what does this all mean? This means if you want to use the ice bath in order to increase metabolism, shiver away. If you want to use the ice bath or cold shower in order to stress inoculate, resist the shiver and learn to stay calm or "muscle through it". I mean, I don't know that anyone's ever really talked about this publicly because I think the data are so new. And I think that people assume that the ice bath or cold exposure is just one thing. Here I've talked about it three ways to shift your circadian rhythm depending on whether or not you're doing it early in the day while your temperature is still rising or at its peak or after that peak, in order to extend the perception of your day as continuing and make you want to go to sleep later and wake up later. Now, and then the third way of course is to either activate brown fat thermogenesis and increase metabolism. I suppose the fourth way would be to increase stress tolerance or stress threshold, okay? But remember, temperature is the effector of circadian rhythms. Light is the trigger. The super charismatic nucleus is the master circadian clock that mediates all these changes, also influenced by non-photic influence like exercise and feeding and things of that sort. But temperature is the effector. Now you can also shift your circadian rhythm with eating. When you travel and you land in a new location and your schedule is inverted 12 hours. One way that we know you can shift your rhythm more quickly is to get onto the local meal schedule. Now that probably has to do with two effects. One or changes in temperature inducer, eating induced increases in body temperature. Now you should understand why that would work as well as eating has this anticipatory secretion of beta, of hyper cretin orexin that I talked about it earlier. So, if this is getting a little too down in the weeds, don't worry about it. I will get more into this in episode four of how to shift one's rhythm. But I would love for people to understand that light and temperature are the real heavy duty leavers when it comes to moving your circadian rhythm and sleep times and activity schedules and exercise and feeding can help, but really temperature and light, with light being the primary one are the most important when it comes to sleep and wakefulness. Many people asked questions about food and neurotransmitters and how those relate to sleep, wakefulness and mood, which is essentially 25 hours of content for me to cover. But I'm going to try and distill out the most common questions. We've talked a lot about neuromodulators like dopamine, acetylcholine and norepinephrine. You may notice in those discussions that the precursors to say serotonin is tryptophan. Tryptophan actually comes from the diet. It comes from the foods that we eat. tyrosine is the precursor to dopamine. It comes from the foods that we eat. And then once we ingest them those compounds are circulated to a variety of different cells and tissues, but it is true that our food and the particular foods we can influence, things like neuromodulator levels to some extent, it's not the only way, because there are also enzymes and biochemical pathways that are going to regulate how much tyrosine gets converted into dopamine and there are elements of the dopaminergic neurons, the dopamine neurons themselves that are electrical that have influence on this as well. But there are a couple fair assumptions that we can make. First of all, nuts and meats in particular red meats, tend to be rich in things like tyrosine, right? That tells you right there, that because tyrosine is the precursor of dopamine, and dopamine is the precursor of norepinephrine, and epinephrine that those foods tend to lend themselves toward the production of dopamine and epinephrin and the sorts of things that are associated with wakefulness. Now, of course, the volume of food that we eat also impacts our wakefulness. If we eat a lot of anything, whether or not it's ribeye steaks, rice, or cardboard, please don't eat cardboard, your stomach if it's very distended it will draw a lot of blood into your gut and you will divert blood from other tissues and you'll become sleepy. So it's not just about food content, it's also about food volume, all right? Fasting states generally are associated with more alertness, epinephrin so forth and fed states are generally associated with more quiescence and relaxation, serotonin, and the kind of things that lend themselves more towards sleep and less toward alertness. Foods that are rich in tryptophan tend to be things like white meat, turkey, also complex carbohydrates. So if you like you can start experimenting depending on what foods you eat. You can start experimenting with carbohydrate rich meals for accessing sleep and more depth of sleep. This is actually something I personally do. I tend to eat pretty low carbs during the day. I actually fast for until about noon. Not because I have to work to do that, but because I'd rather just drink caffeine and water during that time. And then sometime around noon I can't take it anymore and I'm hungry. And I eat and I try and eat low carb-ish unless I've worked out extremely hard in the previous two hours, which I rarely do, although I do it sometimes. And that meal is then designed to prolong my period of wakefulness into the late afternoon. And then sometime around dinner time which for me is around 6:37 PM, 8:00 PM. Sometimes as late as 9:00 PM, I tend to eat things like white meat, fish, pastas, rice, that kind of thing. My favorite food of all for accessing tryptophan is actually a starch. It's actually a vegetable. And it's the croissant, which is my favorite vegetable. I don't eat those all the time, but I love them and they seem to increase dopamine as well. I've never actually done the mass spectrometry on a croissant, but they definitely increase tryptophan and relaxation for me. In all seriousness, low carbohydrate/fasted/ketogenic diets tend to lend themselves toward wakefulness by way of increasing epinephrin, norepinephrine, adrenaline dopamine, and things of that sort. Carbohydrate rich meals. And I suppose we talked about meals as opposed to diet tend to lend themselves more toward tryptophan, serotonin and more lethargic states. There is very limited evidence that I am aware of that carbohydrates should be eaten at one time a day as it relates to metabolism, et cetera. I'm sure that will open up a certain amount of debate. If you work out very hard and you deplete glycogen, then this all changes. So some people are working out very hard in depleting glycogen and other people are not. That gets way outside the context of this particular podcast, but yes indeed different foods can bias different neuromodulators and thereby can modulate awaking or our feelings of lethargy and sleepiness. There are a couple effects of food that are independent or I should say a couple of facts of eating, 'cause the food won't do it when it's sitting across the table, but of eating that are powerful for modulating circadian, rhythm, wakefulness, et cetera. And that's because every time we eat we get eating induced thermogenesis regardless of what we eat. Now that eating induced thermogenesis and increase in metabolism, which is an increase in temperature really, is probably greatest for amino acid rich foods like meats, but also other types of foods. It's a minimal increase in body temperature compared to say cold exposure or exercise. Now, whether or not it's a quarter of a degree or half a degree or a degree, it really depends on the individual. And of course there are blood sugar effects. There are things like whether or not you are type one or type two diabetic, whether or not you're insulin resistant, whether or not like there's a kid who interns on the podcast here, who's 17 years old and I'm convinced that he can eat anything and he just seems to like burn it up and he's growing it every time. Actually the other day, he walked into the other room and two days later, he walked out of the same room. He came out in between of course, but and I was like, you're grow? And he was like, you know, but he's at that stage where he's just growing. Food is going to affect a teenager very differently than it's going to affect a full-grown person. So, in general, starchy carbohydrates, white meat, such as turkey, some fish increased tryptophan, therefore serotonin, therefore more lethargic states more calm. Meat, nuts and there are probably some plant-based foods that I'm not aware of and I apologize, I should read up on this that also are high in tyrosine that can increase things like dopamine, norepinephrine, epinephrin alertness. So you can vary these however you like. Most people I think are eating a variety of these things in a given meals. And there are other parameters of nutrition that are important too. Volume of food for the reasons that I mentioned before, the volume of food in the gut, less food in the gut whether or not it's empty or a small amount of food which tend to correlate with wakefulness. Large volumes of food of any kind will tend to correlate and drive the calming response and that's by way of this nerve pathway called the vegas. We actually have sensory fibers in the gut that communicate to a little protrusion of neurons that sit right next to the juggler called the nodose ganglia N-O-D-O-S-E unlike Costello, it's no dose right now he's all dose. Nodose actually means having many protrusions and it's like kind of a lumpy collection of neurons. A ganglia is just a collection of neurons. And then it goes into the brain stem and then forward in the brain to the areas of the brain they're involved in production of various neuromodulators. So what we eat and the volume of food are both signaling to the brain. It's not just one or the other. And then there's also this eating induced thermogenesis. And now, you know, from the discussion about temperature that if you're eating early in the day you're tending to shift your rhythm earlier. So that you'll want to wake up earlier the next day if you're eating very late in the day, even if you can fall asleep after that, there's a tendency for you to want to sleep later the next day. Now this of course is all going to be constrained by when your kids need to eat, and when your spouse needs to eat, and when your friends need to eat, or if you live alone or what other things you're doing, if you're like me and you kind of don't eat until noon then eat sometime around noon. And then I'm terrible about meals. I just start eating the ingredients while I'm supposed to be cooking and then eventually they're all gone and I guess that's a meal. It varies. Some people are neurotically attached to a particular meal schedule. Some people are not. I take my light exposure schedule far more seriously than I take my meal schedule. Although in general, try and eat healthy foods for the most part croissants included. I was asked several times whether or not men and women or males and females differ in terms of these neurotransmitter phenotypes and the rhythms of sleep and temperature, or we could probably devote a whole month and we probably will devote an entire month to what are called sex differences because those tend to be related to things we absolutely know like XX, or XY chromosomes or XYY in some cases are double X chromosomes as opposed to gender, sex and karyotype as we call it genetic makeup is crystal clear. There are things that correlate with one or the other but it's complicated and it's not something that's been explored in what I think is enough detail. Actually recently, I guess it was about five years ago, the national institutes of health made it a mandate that all studies use sex as a biological variable, and actually explore both sexes of mice, both sexes of humans when doing any kind of study because there was a bias towards only using male animals or male subjects prior to that time. So a lot of data now coming out revealing important sex differences that I think are going to have powerful impact on health practices, et cetera. Response to drugs, response to just different sleep schedules, et cetera. Perhaps the most salient and obvious one is that during pregnancy females experience a whole range of endocrine and neuro effects and we definitely will devote a month to pregnancy and childbirth and child rearing. And for that, I'd really like to bring in some experts. I've got terrific colleagues at Stanford and elsewhere that work on these things, so that we can go into those in more depth. So I'm not blowing off those questions. I'm just, I'm kind of pushing them down the road a little bit where I can give you a more thorough answer. So as we finish up, I just want to offer you the opportunity to do an experiment. We've talked about a lot of variables that can impact sleep and wakefulness. And in keeping with the theme of the podcast we are going to continue to talk about sleep and wakefulness and tools for those, and the science behind those tools as we go forward. But there are really just four simple parameters that you have control over, that you can immediately start to record and take note of just to see how you're doing with these things. With no judgment or perhaps no change to what you're actually doing. It might be interesting, just a suggestion to write down for each day when you went outside to get sunlight and when you did that, relative to waking. So you would write down, like the way I do this in my calendar is I'll write down that I don't get exact about it. I might say, I woke up at 6:15 and then I, as I'll put a W 6:15, and then SL for sunlight and you'll sometimes get outside right away. Other times I'm less good at that. And I'll go out around, let's say seven and for how long, I don't maybe like 10, 15 minutes or so. And then I'll put a little check at the times that I eat my so-called meals. Although, as I mentioned, sometimes my meals are a bunch of small checks that just kind of extend through the late hours of the day. Yours might be more confined to certain times. And then you might just take note of when you exercised, just put down an E for when you exercise. Weight training or aerobic exercise. And you might note when you might've felt chilled or cold if you do, or you might've felt particularly hot, or if you woke up in the middle of night, when you felt particularly hot. And then the last thing you might want to do is just write down if and when you did a non sleep deep rest protocol, an STR protocol, that could be meditation, that could be yoga nidra, that could be hypnosis. Anything that you're using to deliberately teach your nervous system, how to go from more alertness to more calmness in the waking state, even if it's waking up in the middle of the night and doing an SDR protocol or in the afternoon, or first thing in the morning to recover some sleep and ability to perform DPOs that you might've lost from a minimal or poor night's sleep. So you're going to rite down when you woke up, when you viewed sunlight, that might be in the morning and the evening, or just the morning, hopefully it's the morning and the evening, when you exercised, when you eat your meals and using a simple record keeping scheme like W for waking, SL for sunlight maybe you come up with a system where it's a check or an X or something for exercise. This is not designed to make you neurotically attached to tracking all your behaviors and everything you do. I for instance, don't track what I eat. In particular, I kind of know what works for me and I'd just try and stay within that range. But by doing this you can start to reveal some really interesting patterns. Patterns that no answer that I could provide you about any existing tool or protocol could counter. It's really about taking the patterns of behaviors, of waking, and light viewing, and eating, and exercise and superimposing that on what you're learning in this podcast and elsewhere of course and what you already know and trying to see where certain problem or problems or pain points might be arising. Maybe you're eating really late in the day and you're waking up in the middle of the night, really warm. Well, now you would say, "Well, that could be due to kind of an increase in temperature that is extending my day or maybe you start to find that using cold exposure early in the day is great for you, but using it late, if it's too late in the day, that's not great. Or if you're into the sauna or it's even like some people, including myself, if I take a hot shower or sit in a hot tub or a sauna late at night, well then I get a compensatory decrease in body temperature and I sleep great provided I hydrate well enough, 'cause that can be kind of a dehydrating thing to sit in hot, hot conditions. But if I do the sauna early in the day, unless I exercise immediately afterward then I tend to get the temperature drop, which makes sense because when you get in the sauna, you're get vasodilation. You throw off a lot of heat and then you generally get a compensatory drop in temperature. If you do that early in the day, that's right about the time that temperature is trying to entrain the circadian clocks of your body. That's what happens to me. Other people, it might be slightly different and some people have more resilient systems than others. So I just encourage you to start becoming scientists of your own physiology of your own brain and body and seeing how the various tools that you may or may not be using are effecting your patterns of sleep, your patterns of attention and wakefulness. It's vitally important that if you do this, that you know that it's not about trying to get onto an extremely rigid schedule, it's really about trying to identify variables that are most powerful for you, and that push you in the direction that you want to go. And changing the variables that are pushing your body and your mind in the directions that you don't want to go. Self experimentation is something that should be done slowly, carefully, you don't want to be reckless about this. And this is where I would say manipulating one or two variables at a time is really going to be best as opposed to changing of a dozen things all at once to really identify what it is that's most powerful for you. As always, thank you so much for your questions. We are going to continue to answer questions. I certainly didn't get to all of them but we tried to get to most all of the ones that were frequently asked. Episode four of the podcast, I'm going to get into, shift work, jet lag and age dependent changes in sleeping and wakefulness and cognition. So for those of you with kids, for those of you that are kids for those of you with older relatives or who might be older meaning probably when you start to get into late '60, '70 and '80 is when there's some marked biological shifts in temperature regulation and things that relate to sleep. And for those of you that travel, we're going to talk about jet lag. The shift work discussion might seem only relevant to those that work nights, but actually that's not the case. Most people because of the way they're interacting with devices are actually in a form of shift work now, where the days are certainly not nine to five, the so-called banker's hours, and then the lights are out at nine and they're asleep until 5:00 AM. Some people have that schedule, most people do not. So episode four, we will go deeply into shift work, jet lag age dependent changes in sleep alertness and cognition and I will touch back on a few of your questions but don't think that if your question wasn't answered during these office hours that we won't get to it, I absolutely will at some point. In addition to that, several of you have graciously asked how you can help support the podcast. And we very much appreciate that. You can support the podcast by liking it on YouTube, by subscribing on YouTube, by recommending the YouTube videos to others, as well as subscribing and downloading the podcast on Apple where you can also leave a review and on Spotify, we're all three, if you like. you can also help us by supporting our sponsors. So check out some of the sponsor links that were described at the beginning of the episode. And in general, recommending the podcast to people that you know and that you think would benefit from the information would be terrific. As always I will be continuing to post on Instagram. You can expect another podcast episode out next Monday about the topics that we've been discussing this month and above all, [upbeat music] thank you for your interest in science.

========================================

--- Video 347 ---
Video ID: nm1TxQj9IsQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nm1TxQj9IsQ
Title: Master Your Sleep & Be More Alert When Awake
Published: 2021-01-11 13:59:33 UTC
Description:
Today's episode provides a host of information on what makes us sleepy, sleep soundly, and feel awake and alert. It covers a broad range of tools for anyone wishing to improve their sleep and wakeful state. The science and logic for each tool is described. Please put your questions related to Episodes 1 & 2 in the comments section below so I can address them in Episode 3 "Office Hours".

Note: a special episode devoted to shift workers and jetlag is coming out soon.

As always, thank you for your interest in science!

For an updated list of our current sponsors, please visit our website as previous sponsors mentioned in this podcast episode may no longer be affiliated with us: https://www.hubermanlab.com/sponsors

*Follow Huberman Lab*
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Introduction  
00:03:30 What Is Sleep Really For?  
00:06:15 Sleep Hunger  
00:09:00 Caffeine: Devil & Angel  
00:12:20 Timing Your Sleep Properly  
00:14:15 Release Your Hormones (At The Right Times)  
00:18:45 (Pineal) Melatonin Warning  
00:24:30 Strange Vision Is Good Vision  
00:32:50 Blue Light Is Great!  
00:37:00 The Real Problem With Smartphones  
00:38:30 Blind / Low Vision People  
00:39:45 Using Exercise & Food To Set Your Clock  
00:42:00 The Power of Sunset  
00:46:43 The Healthy Holes In Your Skull  
00:48:15 Bad Light  
00:51:11 Light Location  
00:53:00 Fire / Candlelight  
00:54:00 When To Eat  
00:55:40 How To Wake Up Earlier  
01:08:00 Using The Body To Control The Mind  
01:10:00 Drugs & Supplements  
01:18:00 Sleep Walking  
01:20:00 Office Hours

#HubermanLab #Science #Sleep 

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. (energetic music) I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today's podcast episode is all about sleep, and we're also going to talk about the mirror image of sleep, which is wakefulness. Now, these two phases of our life, sleep and wakefulness, govern everything about our mental and physical health, and we're not just gonna talk about what's useful about sleep, we're also gonna talk about how to get better at sleeping, and that will include how to get better at falling asleep, timing your sleep, and accessing better sleep quality. In doing so, we're also gonna discuss how to get more focused and alert in wakefulness, so because sleep and wakefulness are related, we really can't have a conversation about one without the other. Now, in keeping with this theme, you may catch a few snores in the background. Unlike me, my bulldog, Costello, can fall asleep anywhere, anytime, and he happens to be sleeping over there in the corner, so if you hear snoring, that's what that's about. As always, I wanna just mention that this podcast is part of my effort to bring zero-cost-to-consumer public education about science and science-related tools, it is unrelated to my teaching and research roles at Stanford School of Medicine. Today's podcast is brought to us by Helix mattresses, having the proper sleep environment, both the environment you're sleeping in and the object you're sleeping on, is critically important to getting a good night's sleep. Helix mattresses are a little different than most because they're matched to your specific sleep needs, as well as whether or not you tend to run hot or cold as you sleep through the night, what position you sleep in, and so forth, so if you go to their website, they have a quiz that you can take that matches you to the particular mattress that's gonna be best for your sleep needs. I've always had a lot of trouble sleeping, I'm one of these people that can fall asleep easily, but then I wake up and I have a hard time getting back to sleep, and once I switched to a Helix mattress that was precisely matched to my sleep needs, I found I could sleep through the night, which has made a tremendous difference for me. If you wanna try Helix mattresses, you can go to helixsleep.com/huberman, and that will give you up to $200 off on a mattress order, as well as two pillows free with your mattress order, and of course, having the proper pillows is just as important as having the proper mattress. Today's podcast is also brought to us by Headspace, Headspace is a meditation app that teaches you how to meditate. It's fair to say that now there's a ton of research out there in peer-reviewed journals supporting the fact that mindfulness meditation can support mental and physical health, but many people find it hard to meditate, in fact, I'm one of these people. I started meditating in my teens, but then I would drop it every few weeks or so and then I'd get back to it maybe the following week or every year, I just was not very regular about my meditation practice, and then a few years ago I was flying a lot for work and I was on JetBlue flights, and they have Headspace as part of the choice of things that you can watch on the TV screen, and as I started meditating more regularly, what I found is my sleep was better, I would arrive feeling more rested, it was just a tremendous effects on my work performance and other aspects of my life. If you wanna try Headspace, you can go to headspace.com/specialoffer, if you do that, you'll get one month of all of Headspace's meditations for free, that's the best offer right now, so if interested, go to headspace.com/specialoffer. So let's talk about sleep, sleep is this incredible period of our lives where we are not conscious. We might dream, we might twitch, we might even wake up, but in sleep, we are only in relation to things that are happening within our brain and body. Outside sensory experience, in most cases, can't really impact us, and yet, sleep is this tremendously important period of life because it resets our ability to be focused, alert, and emotionally stable in the wakeful period, so we can't really talk about wakefulness, focus, motivation, mood, wellbeing without thinking about sleep, and that's why we're devoting this entire month to the discussion about sleep. Now, we also can't talk about sleep and think about sleep without thinking about wakefulness because it turns out that the period that we call sleep and the period we call wakefulness are tethered to one another. What we do in the waking state determines when we fall asleep, how quickly we fall asleep, whether or not we stay asleep, and how we feel when we wake up the next day, and today, we're going to talk mostly about how to get better at sleeping, and the reason for starting the conversation that way as opposed to just diving into a lot of biology about sleep, is because first of all, there's a lot of information out there already about the biology of sleep. We're gonna touch on a little bit of this, things like stages of sleep and sleep spindles, melatonin, and dreaming, but I think that by now, most people are aware that getting a really good night's sleep on a consistent basis is critically important, but most people don't know how to do that. In fact, I'm guessing that very few of you out there are consistently getting seven to nine hours of really terrific sleep, waking up feeling rested and like you're ready to attack the day, and being able to go through the day feeling focused and alert without dips in energy or focus, so if you're like most people, which includes me, you have some challenges with sleep at least every third or fifth night or so and maybe even more often, so we're really gonna go tool-heavy today and talk about tools that can help you fall asleep, sleep better, and emerge from sleep feeling more rested, and we're gonna do that by grounding our discussion of tools in peer-reviewed studies, mostly from the last 10 years, although some even more recent than that, and we're gonna start by discussing what is sleep and what governs the timing of the onset of sleep, in other words, what makes you get sleepy at a particular time of day. So what determines how well we sleep and the quality of our wakeful state? Turns out that's governed by two forces, the first force is a chemical force, it's called adenosine. Adenosine is a molecule in our nervous system and body that builds up the longer we are awake, so if you've just slept for 8, or 9, or 10 really deep, restful hours, adenosine is gonna be very low in your brain and body. If, however, you've been awake for 10, 15, or more hours, adenosine levels are going to be much higher. Adenosine creates a sort of sleep drive or a sleep hunger, and actually, hunger is the appropriate word here because for most of what we're gonna discuss today, we can think of it in an analogous way to nutrition. Your nutrition and how well you feel after you eat certain foods, your overall level of fitness and your cellular health and your heart health isn't governed by any one food item that you might eat or not eat, it's governed by a number of different factors, how often you eat, how much you eat, which items you eat, et cetera, and what works best for you. In the same way, your sleep and your wakefulness are the product of kind of the average of a number of different behaviors, how long you've been awake is a key one because of this molecule, adenosine. So the reason you get sleepy when you've been up for a while is because adenosine is creeping up steadily the longer you've been awake, and a good way to remember this and think about adenosine is to think about caffeine. Caffeine, for most people, except a very small percentage of people, wakes them up, it makes them feel more alert, in fact, some people are so sensitive to caffeine that they feel jittery if they drink it even in small amounts, other people can drink large amounts of caffeine and not feel jittery at all. Caffeine acts as an adenosine antagonist, what that means is that when you ingest caffeine, whether or not it's coffee or soda or tea, or in any other form, it binds to the adenosine receptor, it sort of parks there just like a car would park in a given parking slot, and therefore, adenosine can't park in that slot. Now, when caffeine parks in the adenosine receptor slot, nothing really happens downstream of that receptor, the receptor can't engage the normal cellular functions of making that cell and you feel sleepy. So the reason caffeine wakes you up is because it blocks the sleepiness receptor, it blocks the sleepy signal, and this is why when that caffeine wears off, adenosine will bind to that receptor, sometimes with even greater, what we call affinity, and you feel the crash, you feel especially tired. Now, I'm not here to demonize caffeine, I love caffeine, and I drink it in the morning and I drink it in the afternoon, but I'm one of these people that, either because of my tolerance or because of some genetic variations that exist among people in terms of their adenosine receptors, I can drink caffeine as late as 4:00 or 5:00 p.m. in the evening and still fall asleep just fine. Some people can't have any caffeine at all or can't have any caffeine past 11:00 a.m. or else their sleep is totally disrupted. All of this has to do with the relationship between adenosine and these adenosine receptors, genetic variation, things that are very hard to find out except experimentally, meaning each of you needs to decide and figure out for yourselves whether or not you can tolerate caffeine and at what times of day you can tolerate caffeine in order to still fall asleep easily and get good sleep, so rather than demonize caffeine, or say that everyone can drink caffeine until late, you need to figure out what's right for you. Caffeine has a lot of health benefits, it also, for some people, can be problematic for health, it can raise blood pressure, et cetera, caffeine increases this molecule that's a neuromodulator that we call dopamine, we discussed this in episode one, which tends to make us feel good, motivated, and give us energy because, as you may have learned in episode one, dopamine is related to another neuromodulator called epinephrine, which gives us energy, in fact, epinephrine is made from dopamine. So let's just take a step back and think about what we're talking about when we're talking about sleepiness, sleepiness is driven by increases in adenosine that happen naturally, caffeine prevents the adenosine from having its action of making us sleepy by blocking that receptor, so it gives us energy and it increases our dopamine levels, but some people can't tolerate caffeine very well, other people can tolerate it just fine, so you need to determine that experimentally. All the data say there's tremendous variation, and right now, the only way that I'm aware of for you to decide whether or not caffeine is a good or a bad thing for you, and whether or not you should ingest it at a given time of day or at all is really to figure that out on your own, in fact, there's a small subset of people that can drink caffeine until very late and they have no trouble falling asleep because they actually have a mutant form of the adenosine receptor, so in keeping with the theme of science and science-related tools, this is one of those cases where I can't give you a one-size-fits-all prescription except to say you need to experiment with caffeine in a way that's safe for you and explore that and figure out what works for you, and then stick with that. Okay, so adenosine is driving this sleep hunger, when adenosine is low, it's like we're well-fed, we're not very hungry, and when adenosine is high, it's like we're fasted for a long time and we tend to be very hungry, so that when adenosine is high, we really wanna fall asleep. If you want, I'm not suggesting you do this experiment, but you can do it, you can stay up for four more hours than you're used to staying up and you'll find that you're very, very sleepy. That's because adenosine is building up at levels higher and higher because you've been awake for those extra four hours. However, if you've ever pulled an all-nighter, you'll notice something interesting, as morning rolls around, you'll suddenly feel an increase in your energy and alertness again, even though adenosine has been building up for the entire night. Now, why is that? The reason that is is because there's a second force which is governing when you sleep and when you're awake, and that force is a so-called circadian force, circadian means about a day or about 24 hours, and inside all of us is a clock that exists in your brain and my brain, and the brain of every animal that we're aware of, that determines when we want to be sleepy and when we want to be awake. Just think about it, we don't go through the day wanting to fall asleep every 30 minutes and then feeling like we're wide awake, our sleep and our period of sleepiness tends to be condensed into one block, typically one 6- to 10-hour block, although there's also variation in terms of how much people want to sleep, and we're going to discuss how you can diagnose your absolute sleep need as well as how to recover sleep that you've lost. That block of sleep and when it falls within each 24-hour cycle is governed by a number of different things, but the most powerful thing that's governing when you want to be asleep and when you want to be awake is light, and in particular, it's governed by sunlight, and I can't emphasize enough how important and how actionable this relationship is between light and when you want to sleep. It's quite simple on the face of it and it's quite simple to resolve, but people tend to make a big mess of this whole circadian literature, frankly, so let's just break it down from the standpoint of what's going on in your brain and body as you go through one 24-hour day. Let's start with waking, so regardless of how well you slept at night or whether or not you were up all night, most people tend to wake up sometime around when the sun rises, maybe not right at sunrise, but within an hour or two or maybe three of sunrise. Now, I realize there are night-shift workers and there are people traveling and experiencing jet lag where this is not going to be the case, we are gonna deal with jet lag and shift work at the end of this podcast, but for most people, we tend to wake up about the time that the sun is rising or so, and as we do that, adenosine levels tend to be low if we've been asleep for reasons that you now understand, and our system generates an internal signal that is in the form of a hormone. Now, I've talked a lot about neuromodulators and neurotransmitters, I haven't talked a lot about hormones yet on this podcast. The definition of a hormone is it's a substance, a chemical that's released from one organ in your body that goes and acts on other organs elsewhere in your body, including your nervous system. When you wake up in the morning, you wake up because a particular hormone called cortisol is released from your adrenal glands, your adrenal glands sit right above your kidneys, and there's a little pulse of cortisol. There's also a pulse of some, and when I say a pulse, I just mean the release of a little bit, there's also a pulse of epinephrine, which is adrenaline, from your adrenals and also in your brain, and you feel awake. Now, that pulse of cortisol and adrenaline and epinephrine might come from your alarm clock, it might come from you naturally waking up, but it tends to alert your whole system in your body that it's time to increase your heart rate, it's time to start tensing your muscles, it's time to start moving about. It's very important that that cortisol pulse come early in the day, or at least, early in your period of wakefulness, I say that because some people are waking up at 8:00 p.m. and are sleeping all day, but it's very important that that pulse of cortisol occur early in the day and that it happens all at once, it sort of sets a rising tide of cortisol in your system. Now, many of you have probably heard about cortisol in relation to stress, and indeed, as we go through our day and our life, different stressors, different events happen in our life that make us feel more alert. Some of the more stressful ones might be looking at your credit card bill and seeing what seems to be a fraudulent charge, or looking at your phone and suddenly seeing a text that something you thought was gonna happen at a particular time is not gonna happen, or you're running late, those will tend to increase norepinephrine and epinephrine and adrenaline in your system, and if they're severe enough, you'll start getting some pulses of cortisol released from your adrenals throughout the day, but there's this normal, healthy rising tide of cortisol that happens early in the day, and I say healthy because it wakes you up, it makes you feel alert, and it makes you feel able to move and wanting to move and to go about your day for work, for exercise, for school, for social relations, et cetera. So when you wake up in the morning is when that cortisol pulse takes off, and something else important happens, a timer is set in your body and in your nervous system that dictates when a different hormone called melatonin, which makes you sleepy, will be secreted from a particular brain region, so let's talk about that. When you wake up in the morning and you experience that rise in cortisol, there's a timer that starts going, and these are cellular timers and they're dictated by the relation between different organs in your body, that says to your brain and body that in about 12 to 14 hours, a different hormone, this hormone we're calling melatonin, will be released from your pineal gland. So there's two mechanisms here, a wakefulness signal and a sleepiness signal, and the wakefulness signal triggers the onset of the timer for the sleepiness signal. Now, that sleepiness signal that we call melatonin that's released from the pineal comes only from the pineal. Unless you're taking exogenous melatonin, you're supplementing with melatonin, the only source of melatonin in your body is going to be this pineal gland, so let's talk about the pineal gland for a second. The pineal gland is a gland that sits kind of in the little structure near, for the aficionados out there, it's kind of near the fourth ventricle, it's about the size of a pea, Descartes, the philosopher, said that the pineal was the seat of the soul, he said that because it's one of the few structures in the human brain that there's only one of them, you know, most structures, there's one on either side of the brain, so-called bihemispheric, but the pineal, there's only one. I don't know anything about souls, really, certainly not the science of souls, but I think it's very unlikely that the pineal is the seat of the soul, but it is a very interesting organ because it's the only organ in our body that releases melatonin, and that melatonin makes us sleepy and lets us fall asleep. Now, I'm guessing that many of you are probably asking, "Should I take melatonin?" My personal bias on this is, except in rare cases, no, for the following reason, melatonin has a second function, which is that melatonin also suppresses the onset of puberty. In kids, and especially in babies, melatonin isn't just released in the evening 12 to 16 hours after we wake, melatonin is released chronically, or tonically, throughout the day and night, and that chronic or tonic release of melatonin is known to suppress some of the other hormones in other regions of the brain that trigger the onset of puberty. Now, if you or your child has been taking melatonin, don't freak out, as always, any kind of supplement or anything that you're going to take or think about taking, you really need to consult with your doctor, I've said this many times on this podcast and it's in the show notes, et cetera, but before you remove anything or add anything to what you're already doing, please do consult with a healthcare professional. However, melatonin is known to suppress the onset of puberty, so much so that regular, cyclic, cycled periods of melatonin release from the pineal really correlate with the onset of puberty and early adulthood, meaning as we start secreting melatonin only at night, that's also when we tend to transition out of puberty. Now, there are a lot of things that correlate in our nervous system, so that doesn't necessarily mean it controls it, but in this case we know, based on lots of data, endocrinology and so forth, that melatonin suppresses the onset of puberty, so supplementing melatonin could be problematic for that reason, but if you've already gone through puberty, it could also have some impact on other hormone systems in your body, so that's why I personally don't like to use melatonin to fall asleep. There's another reason, which is that melatonin will help you fall asleep but it won't help you stay asleep, and many people who take melatonin find that they wake up three to five hours later unable to fall back asleep. Part of the reason for that might be that melatonin purchased at, you can buy it over the counter in most areas of the world even though it's a hormone, which is a little unusual, you can't just go into a pharmacy, at least in the US, and buy testosterone or cortisol or estrogen, you need a prescription, but you can go buy melatonin for whatever reason, I don't know the reasons for that legality, but it's been shown many times, and now I'm borrowing from some items that were in Matt Walker's book, "Why We Sleep," where he stated there is evidence that, in commercially available melatonin, the amount of melatonin has been tested for various brands, it can range anywhere from being 15% of what's listed on the bottle, okay, so if they list this as 100 milligrams, it would be a tremendously high dose, it turns out it's only 15 milligrams in that particular pill or capsule, or up to 400 times more than what's listed on the bottle, so it's completely unregulated, and so for those of you taking melatonin, I will discuss at the end of the podcast some other potential alternatives that are probably safer and don't have these issues. So should you take melatonin? My personal bias is no, but for many people, they find that it does help them, and so if you do find it helps you, then just consider what I'm saying in light of the other practices that you're doing and talk to your healthcare professional. Okay, so the rhythm of cortisol and melatonin is what we call endogenous, it's happening in us all the time without any external input, in fact, if we were in complete darkness, living in a cave with no artificial lights whatsoever, or we were in complete brightness where we never experienced any darkness, these rhythms of cortisol and melatonin would continue, you would have a bump in cortisol, or a pulse in cortisol, that would drop off with time, and then melatonin would come up about 12 to 14 hours later, but these endogenous systems of our body, which are both hormonal and neural, were set so that external things could govern when they happen. Now, this takes us back to episode one of the podcast that if you haven't listened to already, you might wanna listen to, where we talked about sensation and perception and all that, I'm not gonna review it again here, but there's one particular sensory event, one particular influence on your nervous system that determines when that cortisol is going to start to rise, so if you were in complete darkness, it would happen once per 24-hour cycle, but it would be somewhat later and later each day, whereas under normal circumstances, what happens is you wake up, and what happens when you wake up? You open your eyes. When your open your eyes, light comes into your eyes. Now, the way this system works is that you have a particular set of neurons in your eye, they're called retinal ganglion cells, you don't have to remember that if you don't want to, but these retinal ganglion cells are brain neurons, again, the retina is just the one piece of your brain, actually, two pieces because most of you have two retinas, that resides outside the skull, per se. When light comes into the eye, there's a particular group of retinal ganglion cells, or type of retinal ganglion cells, that perceives a particular type of light and communicates that to this clock that resides right above the roof of your mouth called the suprachiasmatic nucleus, okay? So I know this can get a little complicated, but these retinal ganglion cells, when you open your eyes, light comes in, and an electrical signal is sent to this central clock we call the suprachiasmatic nucleus, and the suprachiasmatic nucleus has connections with essentially every cell and organ of your body. Now, it's vitally important that we get light communicated to this central clock in order to time the cortisol and melatonin properly, and when I say properly, I can say that with confidence because we know based on a lot of evidence that if you don't get your cortisol and melatonin rhythms right, there are tremendously broad and bad effects on cardiovascular health, dementia, metabolic effects, learning, depression, dementia, in fact, there're so many negative effects associated with getting this wrong that I don't wanna get into it in too much detail, in fact, I feel like we've been bombarded with all this information about how we're not sleeping well, we're not sleeping at the right times, we're not sleeping enough, to the point where people now have sleep anxiety, if they can't sleep well for a night, they're feeling overwhelmed by that and it's sort of now they're stressed about not being able to sleep which is making it harder to sleep, et cetera. I really wanna focus on what we can do to anchor these systems properly, so let's think about what happens when we do this correctly and how to do it correctly. When we wake up, our eyes open, now, if we're in a dark room, there isn't enough light to trigger the correct timing of this cortisol-melatonin thing, these rhythms. You might say, "Well, why won't any light do it?" Well, it turns out that these neurons in our eye that set the circadian clock and then allow our circadian clock to set all the clocks of all the cells and organs and tissues of our body responds best to a particular quality of light and amount of light, and those are the qualities of light and amount of light that come from sunlight, so these neurons, what they're really looking for, although they don't have a mind of their own, is the sun at what we call low solar angle, the eye and the nervous system don't know anything about sunrises or sunsets, it only knows the quality of light that comes in when the sun is low in the sky, the system evolved so that when the sun is low in the sky, there's a particular contrast between yellows and blues that triggers the activation of these cells, so if you wake up and you look at your phone or your computer, or you flip on a bunch of artificial lights, will these cells be activated? And the answer is, sort of, they'll be activated but not in the optimal way. What you want to do is get sunlight in your eyes as close to waking as possible. Now, I wanna be really clear about this because I've talked about it on other podcasts when I was a guest and I talked about it on my Instagram feed, and there seemed to be the same questions coming up again and again, these neurons don't know sunlight, per se, they don't know sunrise or sunset, for that matter, they don't know artificial light from sunlight, what they respond best to, however, is the quality and amount of light that comes in when the sun is low in the sky, that means that if you can watch the sunrise, great, that's perfect for triggering activation of these cells, however, if you wake up a few hours after the sunrise, which I tend to most days, personally, you still wanna get outside and view sunlight, you don't need the sunlight beaming you directly in the eyes, there's a lot of photons, light energy, that's scattered from sunlight at this time, but the key is to get that light energy, from sunlight, ideally, into your eyes. Now, I know many of you are already asking, "Well, I live in Scandinavia," or, "I can't get sunlight, "there's buildings around me," et cetera, we will get to all of that, but it's critically important that you get outside to get this light. I had a discussion with a colleague of mine, Dr. Jamie Zeitzer, who's in the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences at Stanford, a world expert in this, and he tells me that it's 50 times less effective to view this sunlight through a window, through a car windshield, or through the side window of a car than it is to just get outside with no sunglasses and view light early in the day. Now, if you can't see the sunrise, like I said, you can see this within an hour or two of sunrise, but it has to be low solar angle, once the sun is overhead, the quality of light shifts so that you miss this opportunity to time the cortisol pulse, and that turns out to be a bad thing to do, you really wanna time that cortisol pulse properly because, we'll get into this a little bit more later, but a late-shifted cortisol pulse, in particular, a 9:00 p.m. or 8:00 p.m. increase in cortisol is one of the consequences, and maybe one of the causes, of a lot of anxiety disorders and depression, so it's kind of a chicken-egg thing, we don't know whether or not it's correlated with, it's the cause, or the effect, but it's a signature of depression and anxiety disorder. Bringing that cortisol pulse earlier in your wakeful period, earlier in your day, has positive benefits ranging from blood pressure to mental health, et cetera, not gonna list them all off because there's just so many of them, but many, many positive things happen when you are getting the cortisol early in the day far away from your melatonin pulse. Okay, so how long should you be outside? Well, this is gonna vary tremendously because some people live in environments where it's very bright, so let's say it's Colorado in the middle of winter, there's a snowfield, there's no cloud cover, and you walk outside, there's going to be so much photon light energy arriving on your retina that it probably only takes 30 to 60 seconds to trigger the central clock and set your cortisol and melatonin rhythms properly and get everything lined up nicely, whereas if you're in Scandinavia in the depths of winter and you wake up at 5:00 a.m. and the sun is just barely creeping across the horizon and then goes back down again a few hours later, you probably are not getting enough sunlight in order to set these rhythms, so many people find that they need to use sunlight simulators in the form of particular lights that were designed to simulate sunlight, however, and I'm not out to attack the companies that produce those, there's another solution to that, you can simply go outside for longer, even if there's a lot of dense cloud cover, you're probably getting anywhere from 10,000 to 50,000 lux, L-U-X, which is just a measure of light energy, and that should be sufficient to set the circadian clock. You could say, "Well, the lights in my house or my phone "are really, really bright, right? "Everyone's telling us to stay off our phones at night "because they're really bright," but guess what, it turns out that early in the day, your retina is not very sensitive, which means you need a lot of photons, ideally coming from sunlight, to set these clock mechanisms, so looking at your phone or artificial lights is fine if you wake up before sunrise, but it's not going to work to set these clock mechanisms, and this is supported by dozens, if not hundreds, of quality peer-reviewed studies, so you wanna use sunlight, if you can't see sunlight because of your environment, then you are going to have to opt for artificial light, and in that case, you're going to want an artificial light that either simulates sunlight or has a lot of blue light. Now, without going off course here, you might be saying, "Wait, I've heard blue light is bad for me." Actually, blue light is great for this mechanism during the day, we can talk about blue light and blue blockers, but you really want a lot of blue and yellow light arriving on the retina early in the day. Let me be clear about something, you never ever want to look at any light, sunlight or artificial light, that is painful to look at. If you find that your eyes are watering or you're having challenges maintaining, you know, looking at this thing for a while because it's painful, that light is too bright and you do not wanna damage your retina, so you don't wanna gaze at the sun refusing to blink and burn your retina, that's actually possible to do, you don't wanna do that. You have a proper blink reflex installed in you since birth, and if you feel like something's too bright and you need to blink, it means you need to blink, that it's too much light, so please don't beam your eyes with really bright light, but blue light, in particular, blue light and yellow light coming from sunlight is ideal, if you're going to get it from artificial light because you can't get enough sunlight, well, then, artificial lights that are rich in blue, blue wavelengths, are going to be ideal for setting this mechanism. A lot of people will say, "Oh, I should be "wearing blue blockers throughout the day." No, that's the exact wrong thing, if you're going to use blue blockers, we can talk about that, that should be reserved for late in the evening because light suppresses melatonin. I've been asked many times before about this pineal gland and there are a lot of ancient practices that map to some of the things that I'm saying, and people will always say, "Oh, I heard that sunlight "is great for the pineal." Well, perhaps, but we have to careful about that phrase, sunlight inhibits the pineal, it prevents it from releasing melatonin, darkness allows the pineal to release melatonin, so the pineal is not the gland or the organ of sunlight, it is the gland of darkness, in fact, melatonin can be thought of as a sleepiness signal that's correlated with darkness, so get up each morning, try and get outside, I know that can be challenging for people, but anywhere from 2 to 10 minutes of sunlight exposure is going to work well for most people, and you wanna do this on a regular basis and you don't have to do it exactly at sunrise, I realize I'm repeating myself, but somehow, despite barking at people about this for a couple years now, I keep getting the same questions, and somehow, it hasn't been sinking in, which could be related to some circadian disorder, I'm just kidding, if it's not sinking in, it's probably that I'm not being effective in communicating the information, but get that bright light early in the day from sunlight, and if you can't get it from sunlight, get it from artificial light. What kinds of artificial lights will work? Well, there are these sunrise simulators, but the ring lights that people use for selfies and this sort of thing, for posting on Instagram, those generate a lot of blue light. If wanna get experimental about this, there's a free app, I have no relationship to the app, but it's a great app called Light Meter that you can use your phone and you can measure the amount of photon energy in your environment, and it's kind of a fun experiment to do, you can go outside in the morning and you'll see that there's 10,000, 20,000 lux, even though it might seem like it's kinda dim or there's tree cover or cloud cover, you go inside and you shine an artificial light at your phone, press the button on Light Meter and you'll find that it's only 500 or 1,000 lux, and you realize that even though it seems really bright, the artificial light is very condensed, whereas the outside light is scattered in the atmosphere, and so you can think that you're not getting much sunlight but you're actually getting much more outside, so get outside, get that sunlight early in the day, and try and do it on a consistent basis. If you can't do it every day or you sleep through this period of the early day, low solar angle, don't worry about it, these systems in the body, these hormone systems and neurotransmitter systems that make you awake at certain periods of the day and sleepy at other times are operating by averaging when you view the brightest light. Now, that can immediately tell us that what most people are doing is terrible, they're waking up and they're looking at their phone, which isn't triggering activation of these cells in the eye and the central circadian clock, then a few hours later, they might get in their car with sunglasses and drive. Now, a note about sunglasses and prescription lenses, absolutely never, ever, ever compromise safety for the sorts of things I'm talking about, so if you need to wear sunglasses for safety reasons, wear them, absolutely, if you wear prescription lenses or contacts, wear them, they won't filter out the wavelengths of light that are necessary for setting these central clocks, so safety first, of course, if you have a retinal degenerative disorder, retinitis pigmentosa, macular degeneration, or glaucoma, or those run in your family, you want to avoid excessively bright light all the time, you wanna be very cautious about that, you're going to wanna get your light exposure through seeing dimmer light, including sunlight, but for longer periods of time, perhaps. You might immediately ask, "What about low-vision or blind people, "how do they set these central clocks?" Well, turns out that low-vision and blind people, most of them, provided they still have eyes, that the eyes weren't removed because of a burn or a tumor or something like that, still maintain these neurons that set the circadian clock, which brings me to a really important point, it's not about seeing and perceiving the sun, this is a subconscious mechanism by which these neurons, which are called melanopsin ganglion cells, these neurons set your central clocks by getting activated by the particular wavelengths of light that are present in the atmosphere, even coming through cloud cover, and you don't need to see or perceive the sun in order to get this mechanism to start. Now, it's such a vitally important mechanism because it dictates how well and what time you will want to fall asleep later in the day, so for those of you that are night owls and you insist that you're a night owl and you have the genetic polymorphism that makes you a night owl, you may very well have that genetic polymorphism, those genes that make you want to stay up late and wake up late, but chances are, about half of you that think that you're night owls are just not getting enough sunlight early in the day. So viewing light early in the day, ideally sunlight, is key for establishing healthy sleep-wake rhythms and for allowing you to fall asleep easily at night. Now, it's not gonna make sure that all that happens every single time, but it is the foundation of proper sleep and what we call circadian health, it governs metabolism and so many other things that are supposed to exist on a regular 24-hour cycle. Some of you, many of you, might be asking, "What else can help set this rhythm?" Well, it turns out that light is what we call the primary zeitgeber, the time giver, but other things can help establish this rhythm of cortisol followed by melatonin 12 to 16 hours later as well. The other things besides light are timing of food intake, timing of exercise, as well as various drugs or chemicals that one might ingest, not illegal drugs, although those will impact circadian mechanisms as well, but the reason we focus so heavily on light is that light is the main way that this central clock, the suprachiasmatic nucleus, was supposed to be set, and we know that because it's the only direct input to the clock. These neurons in the eye that are also part of the brain that we call melanopsin ganglion cells that, not so incidentally, were discovered by my friend and colleague David Berson at Brown University, and others, Samer Hattar, King-Wai Yau, et cetera, worked out the mechanisms, the molecular mechanisms, but it was really David Berson that discovered these incredibly fascinating, you know, these are cells that aren't important for sight like pattern vision, but are for setting our clocks, David's really credited with making that discovery. Those cells are the main way and the only direct way to set the clock, in fact, it's fair to say that light viewed by these melanopsin cells, in particular, sunlight, is 1,000 to 10,000 times more effective than, say, getting up in darkness and just exercising. That doesn't mean that you shouldn't exercise early in the day in darkness if that's what you like to do, it will have somewhat an effect on raising your wakefulness early in the day and setting these rhythms, and this is because of some other pathways, for the aficionados out there who wanna know more neuroscience, here's how it goes, you've got this clock above the roof of your mouth that churns out this 24-hour rhythm and it's communicated to all the other organs and tissues of your body, but there's another structure, it has a cool name, it's called the intergeniculate leaflet, which sits a few millimeters away in the brain, and it's involved in regulating the clock output through what's called non-photic, non-light-type influences like exercise and feeding, et cetera. So if you are not feeling awake during the day and you're having trouble sleeping, get the sunlight exposure that we just talked about, but in addition to that, if you wanna become an early riser, for instance, and you wanna feel more awake during the early part of the day, by getting that light exposure and exercising early in the day, you will, after two or three days, you will naturally start to wake up earlier in the day, and that's because these clock mechanisms have shifted, it's like setting the clock earlier as opposed to delaying the clock, and that takes us to a somewhat complicated, but very important, aspect to all this, which is, what sets the clock and keeps it anchored? The main thing is that bright light early in the day, the other thing is sunset, when the sun is also at low solar angle, low, close to the horizon, by viewing sunlight at that time of day in the evening, or afternoon, depending on what time of year it is and where you are in the world, these melanopsin cells, these neurons in your eye, signal the central circadian clock that it's the end of the day, and there's a really nice study that was published last year, and I will put links to these references on a website not too long from now, there was a really nice study that showed that viewing sunlight around the time of the sunset, doesn't have to be just crossing the horizon, but circa sunset, within an hour or so of sunset, prevents some of the bad effects of light in preventing melatonin release later that same night, so let me repeat this, viewing light early in the day is key, viewing light later in the day when the sun is setting, or around that time, can help protect these mechanisms, your brain and body, against the negative effects of light later in the day, so let me talk about you would do that, you'd go view the sunset or you would go outside in the late afternoon or evening, again, if you safely can do that with sunglasses off, you will, if you need to wear sunglasses, fine, but it will take probably 100 to 1,000 times longer with dark sunglasses than if you take them off, again, if you wanna do this through a window at work, that's fine, but it'll take 50 times longer, so the best thing to do is just to get outside for a few minutes, anywhere from 2 to 10 minutes, also in the afternoon. Having those two signals arriving to your central clock that your body, your internal world, knows when it's morning and knows when it's evening, is tremendously powerful. Maybe think about it this way, every cell in your body needs glucose and energy, it needs, whether or not it gets that from meats or it gets it from ketones or it gets it from carbohydrates or fruit or vegetables, it doesn't matter, it is eventually converted into a certain form of energy that all your cells use, but you don't take glucose, you don't take bread or a steak or a nice orange and shove it in your ear, you put it in your mouth, it goes into your stomach, it's digested, and then that resource is distributed to all the cells of your body. Every cell in your body needs oxygen, and you don't put a hose you know, through your nostril or through your ear or through some other orifice in your body, you inhale air and it's then distributed via the lungs to the cells in your blood stream, and then it's distributed to all the organs of your body. Every cell and organ in your body needs light information, and the way to get that light information to all those cells, because you have a thick skull and the inside of you is dark inside your skin, there's no sunlight getting in there, is by viewing sunlight with your eyes at the two times of day that I'm referring to, okay? That's the only route. There was a study published in "Science," an excellent journal, well over 10 years ago, that showed that light shone on the back of the knee could set these circadian rhythms, that study was retracted, and unfortunately, most people don't know that it was retracted, there were some experimental flaws, that people were actually viewing light through their eyes. That study was repeated, turns out, there is no extraocular photo reception in humans. Whatever somebody tells you that light to the skin or light to the wherever is beneficial for your health, we can talk about that, but there's no way that light information is setting your clocks, you need these cells in your eyes to perceive or to see light at the particular times of day that I'm referring to. Some animals, like snakes and other reptiles, actually have a hole in the top of their skull to get light information directly to their pineal to suppress melatonin. We don't have that hole, I mean, most of you don't have holes in your skull. These holes in your skull that we call the sockets for the eyes are actually there primarily to allow light information to this central clock, and then vision and pattern vision and color vision came much later in evolution, we know this on the basis of genetic studies we get to discuss in a future podcast. So get that light information to the cells of your brain and body by viewing sunlight at the two times of day that I referred to. There's always a lot of questions about, "How long, how much, how do I know if I've had enough?" You'll know because your rhythm will start to fall into some degree of normalcy, you'll start to wake up at more or less the same time each day, you'll fall asleep more easily at night, generally, it takes about two or three days for these systems to align, so if you've not been doing these behaviors, it's gonna take a few days, but they can have tremendous benefits, and sometimes rather quickly, on a number of different mental and physical aspects of your health. Now let's talk about the bad effects of light because light is not supposed to arrive in our system at any time, and nowadays, because of screens and artificial light, we have access to light at times of day and night that normally we wouldn't. Now, earlier I said that you need a lot of light, in particular, sunlight, to set these clock mechanisms, that's true, but there's a kind of diabolical feature to the way all of this works, which is the longer you've been awake, the more sensitive your retina and these cells are to light, so that if you've been awake for 10, 12, 14 hours, it becomes very easy for even a small amount of light coming from a screen or from an overhead light to trigger the activation of the clock and make you feel like you wanna stay up later, make it harder to fall asleep, and disrupt your sleep pattern, okay? So the simple way to think about this is you want as much light as is safely possible early in the day, morning and throughout the day, including blue light, so take those blue blockers off during the day unless you have a real issue with screen light sensitivity, and you want as little light coming into your eyes, artificial or sunlight, after, say, 8:00 p.m., and certainly, you do not want to get bright light exposure to your eyes between 11:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m., and here's why, David Berson, who I mentioned before, and another and friend and colleague, Samer Hattar, who's director of the chronobiology unit at the National Institutes of Mental Health published a paper in "Cell," which is a journal, another excellent journal, very high stringency, showing that light that arrives to the eyes between 11:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m., approximately, suppresses the release of dopamine, this neuromodulator that makes us feel good, and it's sort of an endogenous antidepressant, and can inhibit learning and create all sorts of other detrimental effects, it does this through a mechanism, for those of you that wanna know the neural pathways, that involves light to the eyes that's then signaled to a structure called the habenula, the habenula looks like two little bat ears sitting right in the middle of a structure in your brain called the thalamus, don't worry about these names if you're not interested in this stuff, if you are, these are just avenues to explore, when that habenula gets activated it's actually called the disappointment nucleus because it actually makes us feel less happy and more disappointed, and can lead to certain forms of depression in the wakeful state. Now, if you wake up in the middle of the night and you need to use the bathroom or you're on an all-night flight and you're, you know, need to read or whatever it is, fine, every once in a while, it's not gonna be a problem to get bright light exposure to your eyes in the middle of the night, but if you think about our lifestyle nowadays and being up late looking at phones, even if you dim that screen, you're triggering this activation because your retinal sensitivity and the sensitivity of these neurons has gone up late in the day. Now, I'm not here to dictate what you should or shouldn't do, but for those of you that are experiencing challenges with mood, those of you that have anxiety, learning problems, issues focusing, the questions I usually get are, "How can I focus better?" Well, we will get to that, but one of the best ways you can support your mechanisms for good mood, mental health, learning, focus, metabolism, et cetera, is to take control of this light exposure behavior at night and not get much or any bright light exposure in the middle of the night. Red light won't trigger this pathway, but very few people have the kind of infrared lights that are set up, or floor lights, and that brings me to an important point, which is about the location of light, this hasn't been discussed much out there, I don't think, these cells in our eye, these neurons that signal the central clock, reside mostly, not exclusively, but mostly, in the bottom half of our retina, and because we have a lens in front of our retina, and because of the optics of lenses, that means that these cells are actually viewing our upper visual field, there's an inversion of the visual image, et cetera, you can look that up if you wanna learn more about retinal optics, it's fascinating, but not the topic for today. These cells are in the bottom half of your retina mostly, and so they're viewing the overhead visual space around you. This is probably not coincidental that these cells were essentially designed to detect sunlight, which is overhead, of course, so if you want to avoid improper activation of these neurons, it's better to place lights that you use in the evening low in your physical environment, so on desktops or even the floor, if you wanna go that way, as opposed to overhead lights, so overhead florescent lights would be the worst, that would be the worst case scenario, lights that are overhead that are a little bit softer, of the sort or yellow or reddish tints, would be slightly better, but dim lights that are set low in the room are going to be best because they aren't going to activate these neurons and therefore shift your circadian clock, so that's a goal. Some people, like Samer Hattar that I mentioned earlier, he turns his home basically into a cave in the evenings. Candlelight actually does not trigger activation of these cells, so candlelight and fireplaces and campfires are fine, dim lights, very dim lights are fine, and lights low in the physical environment, of course, the problem with candlelight and fireplaces is the fire hazard, but you're smart people, you know what to do about that. Don't burn down whatever structure you're in, including forests, please. So, keep the lights low in in your environment. What if you wake up in the middle of the night and you find yourself watching TV or on the computer? Well, in that case, you might wanna wear blue blockers, and you certainly would wanna dim the screen, but ideally, you're not doing that, it's remarkable the positive effects of getting that bit of sunlight early in the day, maybe even also around sunset, and avoiding bright lights, and especially overhead bright lights, between about 11:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m.. Now, I'm not talking about shift work, I'm realizing that we're probably gonna have to have an entire discussion devoted just to shift workers because there's some good information there about how they can protect themselves against some of the very bad health effects of shift work, of getting light in the middle of the night, but we rely on shift workers and they're super important to culture and society and the economy, so I wanna acknowledge them and let you know that we will do a discussion about shift work and jet lag, but let's talk about what light can do in terms of shifting us in healthy ways. So the way to think about this whole system, again, is you've got adenosine building up depending on how long you've been awake and it's making you sleepy, and then you've got the circadian mechanisms that are timing your wakefulness and timing when you wanna be asleep, mainly through cortisol and melatonin, but there are a bunch of other things that are downstream of cortisol and melatonin, like, we tend to be hungrier during our wakeful period than late at night, some people like to eat late at night, but if you're finding that you can't become a day person or a morning person, shifting your light exposure, exercise, and food intake to the daytime will help. Some people like to stop eating around 6:00 or 8:00 p.m. because of metabolic reasons or they're trying to maintain their weight or lose weight, that's actually not supported so well by the literature, the literature around nutrition essentially says that it's best to restrict your feeding to a certain period of each 24-hour cycle to not be eating around the clock, and whether or not that's 4 hours or 8 hours or 16 hours is a much lengthier discussion than we have time for now, I would refer you to Satchin Panda's book, "The Circadian Code," which talks all about that, he's an expert, a former colleague of mine from the Salk Institute in San Diego, you can explore intermittent and circadian fasting, so to speak, through Satchin's literature, we'll talk about that, we might even get Satchin in here if we're lucky at some point in the future, but you can actually use light to wake up earlier. Jamie Zeitzer and colleagues did a beautiful study showing that, if you turn on the lights before waking up, so around 45 minutes to an hour before waking up, even if your eyelids are closed, provided you're not under the covers, after doing that for a few days, that increases your total sleep time and shifts forward the time at which you feel sleepy, it makes you want to go to bed earlier each night. Now, in a kind of diabolical way, they did this with teenagers who are notorious for wanting to wake up late and stay up late, and what they found was bright light flashes, just turning on the lights in their environment, overhead lights, because they're trying to activate this system and that's why they're using overhead lights, even through the eyelids, before these kids woke up, then made those kids naturally wanna go to bed earlier and they ended up sleeping longer, so that's something you could try, you could put your lights on a timer to go on early in the day before you wake up, you could open your blinds so that sunlight is coming through, and again, if you curl up under the covers, then it's not gonna reach these neurons, but it's remarkable that light can actually penetrate the eyelids, activate these neurons, and go to the central clock. That study illustrates a really important principle of how you're built, which is, you have the capacity for what are called phase advances and phase delays, and I don't wanna complicate this too much, so the simplest way to think about phase advances and phase delays is that if you see light late in the day, and in particular, in the middle of the night, your brain and body, for reasons that now you understand, will think that that's morning light even though it's not sunlight because you have this heightened sensitivity, and it will phase delay, it will delay your clock, it will essentially make you want to get up later and go to sleep later, so if you get light exposure too late in the evening or in the middle of the night, it's going to make it hard to want to wake up that next morning early and to go to bed early. The opposite is also true, if you wake up early, say, 6:00 a.m. or 7:00 a.m., and get light exposure, or even earlier, 4:00 a.m., and get light exposure, it will phase-advance your clock, okay? It's gonna make your clock think it's earlier and you'll wanna wake up earlier, so the simple way to think about this is if you're having trouble waking up early and feeling alert early in the day, you're going to wanna try and get bright light exposure even before waking up because it will advance your clock, it's sort of like turning the clock forward, whereas if you are having trouble waking up early, you definitely don't want to get too much light exposure or any light exposure to your eyes late in the evening and in the middle of the night because it's just gonna delay your clock more and more, so rather than get into the specifics of everybody's situation because there are many of you out there with different situations and lifestyle requirements, et cetera, the way to think about this is that you have these internal mechanisms of adenosine and circadian clocks, and they're always operating, and what you're trying to do is provide them anchors, you're trying to provide them consistent, powerful anchors so that your cortisol, your melatonin, and then everything that cascades down from that, like your metabolism and your ability to learn and your sense of alertness, your dopamine, your serotonin, all that stuff is timed regularly, one of the reasons why there's so much challenge out there with focus and anxiety and depression, there are a lot of reasons for that, but one of the reasons is that people's internal mechanisms aren't anchored to anything regular. Now, this doesn't require being neurotically attached to getting up at a very specific time, going outside, viewing the sunlight at the same time every day, these systems, again, will average, but if you can provide them consistent light anchors early in the day and in the evening, and avoiding light at night, you will be amazed at the tremendous number of positive effects that can come from that at the level of metabolic factors, hormones, and just general feelings of wellbeing, in fact, most of us are familiar with what it is to not sleep well and all the terrible effects that has, maybe one night you're fine, two nights even, for the new parents out there, I sympathize with you, but most people are not familiar with what it is to sleep really, really well on a consistent basis, and when you start doing that by controlling your sleep environment, right, get the proper sleep surface, get the proper pillow, get the temperature in the room right, get your light exposure right, start timing your exercise at normal periods or times throughout the day and week, it's amazing how many other biological systems just naturally fall in line, and this is why whenever people ask me, "What should I take?" which is one of the most common questions I get, "What supplement should I take? "What drug should I be taking? "What things should I be taking?" The first question I always ask them is, "How's your sleep?" and 90% of the time, they tell me they either have trouble falling asleep or staying asleep or they don't feel rested throughout the day. A brief note about naps, naps, provided that they're less than one ultradian cycle, provided they're 20 minutes or 30 minutes or even an hour, can be very beneficial for a lot of people, you don't have to take them, but many people naturally feel a dip in energy and focus late in the afternoon, in fact, if we were gonna look at wakefulness, what we would find is that you get that morning light exposure, hopefully, your cortisol goes up, people will start feeling awake, and then around two, or three, or four in the afternoon, there's a spike in everything from alertness to ability to learn, some metabolic factors drop, and then it just naturally comes back up, and then it tapers off as the night goes on. So for some of you, naps are great, I love taking naps, some people, they wake up from naps feeling really groggy, that's probably because they're not sleeping as well as they should at night or as long as they should at night, and so they're dropping into REM sleep or deeper forms of sleep in the day time, and then they wake up and they feel kind of disoriented, other people feel great after a nap, so that's another case where, just like with caffeine, so sort of have to evaluate for yourself. As we discuss this, you're probably realizing this is a lot like nutrition where nowadays it's just crazy, I mean, if you go on social media, it's like you've got people who are pushing carnivore, you've got other people who are pushing vegan, other people who are pushing paleo, every variation of every diet, and there's a lot of data to support any and all of those and the arguments go on and on, and there's probably a lot of genetic variation and lifestyle variation that's going to dictate whether or not something is good for you, whether or not you like it, whether or not you'll stick to it. The same thing is true for circadian and sleep and wakefulness behaviors, except the light-viewing behavior that I talked about before, there's no way around that, that's hardwired into our system, the same way we could factually say that everybody needs some nutrition at some level from some source, everybody needs light information arriving in their system in some way at regular intervals, so that's really what this is about. Okay, so naps are gonna be good for some people, not for others, I have a colleague, a very accomplished neuroscientist, who likes to take naps just after lunch, I personally like to take a nap around 3:00 or 4:00 p.m., but there's a practice that I've adopted in the last 5 years that I've found to be immensely beneficial that is sort of like napping but isn't napping, it's a thing that they call yoga nidra, yoga nidra actually means yoga sleep, and it's a sort of meditation that you listen to, there are number of scripts, I've talked about this on podcasts before but I'm going to post a link to the two that I like most, that allows you to consciously bring your entire body and mind into a state of deep relaxation, and sometimes you fall asleep and sometimes you don't, this is done for 10 to 30 or even 60 minutes at a time. The other thing that works really well is meditation, so I'm talking about naps, but I'm also talking about yoga nidra, which is sort of a form of meditation, and then more standard forms of meditation, all three of those do something powerful which is that they bring our mind into a state of less so-called sympathetic nervous system activation, go back and listen to episode one if that doesn't make any sense, which is what governs your alertness, and instead, it activates cells and circuits in your body that promote the parasympathetic nervous system, or the calming system. A lot of people are not good falling asleep because they're not good at calming down, so some people have no trouble falling asleep, but many people have a hard time falling asleep, or at least every once in a while experience challenges falling asleep. I don't have problems falling asleep most nights, but I've noticed that if I'm working very hard or if the world is particularly stressful, my mind gets into a bit of a kind of OCD loop where I tend to ruminate on things, and I'm not even thinking about anything in particular, it's just challenging for me to disengage and fall asleep. Meditation and yoga nidra scripts have been immensely helpful for me in terms of accelerating the transition to sleep, so they involve taking a few minutes, 10 to 30 minutes or so, just like you would for a nap, and just listening to a script, almost passively, and it has you do some particular patterns of breathing and some other kind of body-scan-like things that can really help people learn to relax, not just in that moment, but get better at relaxing and turning off thinking in order to fall asleep when they wanna do that at night. There's another thing that's similar to this, which is certain forms of hypnosis for sleep, for that, I'll just refer you to the website of a colleague and collaborator of mine, David Spiegel, who's our associate chair of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences at Stanford, he's developed a website, which is reverie, R-E-V-E-R-I-E, health.com, so reveriehealth.com, that has a lot of science-supported, clinically supported hypnosis scripts that essentially take the brain into states of deep relaxation for the sake of rewiring the brain and neuroplasticity, but one of those scripts that's there and is available free is for sleep, and we'll talk more about hypnosis at a later time because it has a ton of other effects that aren't just limited to sleep. So a period of time each day that you devote to getting better at falling and staying asleep is actually a really good practice to adopt. The other thing about these practices like meditation, yoga nidra, and hypnosis, is people would always say to me, "Well, when should I do them?" and I always say, "Well, the best time of day to do it "is when you first wake up in the morning, "provided you've gotten your sunlight already, "anytime you wake up in the middle of the night, "or any time of day." In other words, they're always good for you because it's a training mechanism by which you self-train your nervous system to go from a state of heightened alertness that you don't want to heightened relaxation that you do want, and so it's really teaching you to hit the brake, and that brings us to an even more important point, perhaps, which is, we've all experienced that we can stay up if we want to, right? If we wanna stay up late on New Year's or we wanna push an all-nighter, some people can do that more easily than others, but we're all capable of doing that, but it's very hard to make ourselves fall asleep, and so there's a sort of asymmetry to the way our autonomic nervous system, which governs this alertness-calmness thing, the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system, there's an asymmetry there where we are more easily able to engage wakefulness and drive wakefulness, we can force ourselves to stay awake, than we are able to force ourselves to fall asleep, and one of the things that I say over and over again, and I'm gonna continue to say over and over again, is it's very hard to control the mind with the mind, when you have trouble falling asleep, you need to look to some mechanism that involves the body, and all the things I described, meditation, hypnosis, yoga nidra, all involve exhale-emphasized breathing, certain ways of lying down and controlling the body, we're gonna get into breathing in real depth at another time, but all of those involve using the body to control the mind rather than trying to, you know, wrestle your mind into a certain pattern of relaxation, so earlier in episode one, I talked about the Mobius strip, this continuous loop that is the brain-body relationship, or the mind-body relationship, and when we're having trouble controlling the mind, I encourage people to look towards the body, look toward sunlight, avoid sunlight and bright light if that happens to be late at night, so there's a theme that's starting to emerge which is, in order to control this thing that we call the nervous system, we have to look back to some of the things we discussed earlier, like sensation, perception, et cetera, but we have to ask, what can we control? Well, I'm talking about controlling light exposure, controlling your breathing and body, I'm not going into details right now but you can see the yoga nidra script or the reveriehealth.com, or Headspace would be a great place to adopt a meditation practice, any of those are really teaching you to use your body to control your mind, and to allow you to explore the mind-body relationship in a way that gives you more control over your mind and the mind-body relationship, okay? So we talked about light, we talked about activity and timing of light, we talked about the usefulness of naps, and these things that I'm calling non-sleep deep rest, which include meditation, yoga nidra, and hypnosis, non-sleep deep rest, or what I, hereafter, we will refer to as NSDR, not to be confused with EMDR, I don't think I've ever heard NSDR, so I'm planting a flag for NSDR, non-sleep deep rest, as a way to reset one's ability to be awake after you emerge from NSDR, so to get some more wakefulness and ability to attend, some emotional stability, reset, as well as make it better and easier to fall asleep when you wanna go to sleep at night. Now, the non-sleep deep rest does have some research to support it, there's a beautiful study done out of a university in Denmark, I will later provide a link to that study, that showed that this meditation and yoga nidra-type meditation allows dopamine and other neuromodulators in an area of the brain called the striatum that's involved in motor planning and motor execution, to reset itself, in other words, this NSDR can reset our ability to engage in the world in a way that's very deliberate, and not to throw in another acronym, but NSDR resets your ability to engage in DPOs, duration, path, and outcome, so now you're probably rolling your eyes like, "Oh my goodness, the number of acronyms," but just bear with me because NSDR is so powerful, because first of all, it doesn't require that you rig yourself to any device, it doesn't require that you take much time out of your day, it doesn't require that you ingest anything, except air, and it can have so many positive effects right down to the neuromodulator level, so I think in the years to come, my lab's exploring this in a collaboration with David Spiegel's lab, but other labs are looking at this as well, I think NSDR is going to start to play a more prominent role in what we call wellness and health, both mental health and physical health, so I encourage you to explore those practices. Okay, so what about things that we can and maybe should or should not take in order to control and access better sleep and better wakefulness? We've talked about things you can do or not do, we've talked about nutrition and the timing of nutrition, now let's talk about compounds, those could be prescription drugs, those could be supplements, there are a number of different things that will affect your circadian timing and behavior, in fact, almost everything that you could take will affect your circadian timing and behavior, that's right. So years ago when I was in graduate school, I had a professor, unfortunately, he passed away now, but his name was Ted Jones, the late Edward Jones, who was a world-class neuroanatomist, he wrote the book on the thalamus, in fact, it's called "The Thalamus," and an expert on patterns of activation in the brain during sleep, and I'll never forget that during one of these lectures, someone asked Ted the question, "What is the effect of some drug "on these waves of activity in the thalamus?" or something, and his answer was incredible. Now, he was a pretty gruff guy, and so his answer was delivered in the form of a kind of aggressive direct statement, he said, "A drug is a substance "that when injected into a person, "produces a scientific publication," and what he was saying is actually quite true, which is that most every compound will have some effect on some aspect of biology, this is why it's hard to sort through everything that's on PubMed, if you put any molecule or compound or drug into PubMed and then you put sleep next to it, or alertness next to it, you're likely to find a paper where there's an effect, but that's not necessarily telling you that that drug is helpful for that, what it's telling you is that anytime you change what you take or you stop taking something, say you're taking sleeping pills, Ambien or whatever it is, and you stop taking them, your sleep behavior will change. Let's stay you take an aspirin and you don't normally take aspirin, you will shift your circadian rhythm, now you might not shift it perceptibly, you might not create problems for yourself, but anytime you ingest a compound at high potency, you're going to provide some shift to your circadian rhythm. Now, that said, there are a couple things that are directly in line with the biology related to falling and staying asleep and directly in line with the biology of wakefulness, there's a whole category of things, like stimulants, cocaine, amphetamine, and prescription stimulants, that are, the prescription ones were designed for the treatment of narcolepsy, so things like modafinil or armodafinil that are designed to created wakefulness, they are all essentially chemical variants of things that increase epinephrine and dopamine. Now, of course, I'm of the standpoint that things like cocaine and amphetamine are just across the board bad, they have so many addictive and terrible effects, in the proper setting prescribed by the proper professional, things like modafinil for narcolepsy might be appropriate, I know that a lot of people out there take Adderall, even though they haven't been prescribed Adderall, in order to increase wakefulness, that is essentially, well, it's illegal for one, but also it's abusing the system in the sense that you're pushing back on the adenosine system slightly differently than you do caffeine, it will make you feel more alert, there tends to be a heavy rebound and they do have an addictive potential, there are also some other effects of those that could be quite bad, so we're gonna explore stimulants in a whole month related to drugs, but there are some supplements and some things that are safer, certainly safer, and that, in cases where you're doing all the right behaviors, you're exercising and eating correctly and you're still having trouble with sleep, that can be beneficial for falling and staying asleep. Now, I wanna be very clear, I am not pushing supplements, I am just pointing you toward some things that have been shown in peer-reviewed studies to have some benefit. The first one is magnesium, there are many forms of magnesium, but certain forms of magnesium can have positive effects on sleepiness and the ability to stay asleep, mainly by way of increasing neurotransmitters like GABA which help turn off the DPO, the kind of thinking about the future, duration-path-outcome analysis, and make one's mind kind of drift in space and time and make it easier to fall asleep, there are a lot of forms of magnesium out there, but in particular is magnesium threonate, T-H-R-E-O-N-A-T-E, which you have to check to see if this is right for you, check with your doctor, but magnesium threonate is associated with transporters in the body that bring more of it into cells that allow people to feel this kind of drowsiness and help them fall asleep, so I personally, I can only talk about what I personally do, I personally take 3 or 400 milligrams of magnesium threonate about 30 to 60 minutes before sleep, and it helps me fall asleep. The other thing is theanine, T-H-E-A, T-H-E-A-N-I-N-E, theanine, 100 to 200 milligrams of theanine, for me, also helps me turn off my mind and fall asleep, I take it 30 to 60 minutes throughout the day. Interestingly, theanine is now being introduced to a lot of energy drinks in order to take away the jitters that are associated with drinking too much caffeine or with some other things that are in the energy drinks, energy drinks can be problematic, they can contain a lot of L-taurine, I'll just tell you an anecdote, when I was a postdoc, I was drinking a lot of a particular energy drink, it has a lot of taurine in it, and actually the whites of my eyes, the sclera, as it's called, of my eyes turned beet red, and I went to a friend who's an ophthalmologist, I said, "Look, I'm not a marijuana smoker, "I haven't been hit on the head, "I don't know what's going on," and he looked and he said, "I think you've got some microvascular damage," and we walked through what I was taking and doing, and he said, "Oh, it's probably the taurine, "excessive levels of taurine "can create some microvascular damage." So if you're having microvascular damage in your eye, you probably have microvascular damage deeper in your skull, so I stopped, that's the reason why I don't take energy drinks, so just a consideration, again, I'm not here to tell you what to do or not do, but just wanna arm you with information. The thing about theanine and magnesium is taken together, they do, for some people, they can make them so sleepy and sleep so deeply that they actually have trouble waking up in the morning, so you have to play with these things and titrate them if you decide to use them, again, if you decide to go this route, I would not start by taking supplements, I would start by getting your light-viewing behavior correct, and then think about your nutrition and then think about your activity and then think about whether or not you wanna supplement, we already talked about melatonin earlier. There's another supplement that could be quite useful, which is apigenin, A-P-I-G-E-N-I-N, which is a derivative of chamomile, 50 milligrams of apigenin also can augment or support this kind of creation of a sleepiness to help fall asleep and stay asleep. A note about sleepwalkers and people with very vivid dreams, theanine can often make your dreams very vivid, sleepwalkers should be careful about taking theanine, everyone should be careful about taking anything, and don't take anything without consulting your board-certified M.D. or healthcare professional first, okay? Your health is your responsibility, I am not gonna take responsibility for what you decide to do experimentally in any case, but especially as it relates to supplementation and drugs. As a important point, apigenin is a fairly potent estrogen inhibitor, so women who want to keep their estrogen levels high, or at whatever levels they happen to be at, should probably avoid apigenin altogether, and men, take that into consideration as well, men need estrogen also, you don't wanna completely eliminate your estrogen, that it can create all sorts of bad effects on libido and cognition, et cetera, so apigenin in some people is gonna be a pretty strong estrogen inhibitor, so keep that in mind. There are other things you can take to help you sleep better, those are the legal ones that, at least I'm aware of, have pretty broad safety margins, but again, you need to explore your safety margins with any compound. I think a great website that I can refer you to is examine.com, examine, the word, just as it sounds, .com, is a website, I have no relation to them, but there, you can find links to peer-reviewed studies for any compound or supplement, as well as some important warnings related to the things I discussed, as well as any other thing that you might decide to supplement with or ingest to help improve your sleep. Okay, that was a lot of information about how to get better at sleeping, falling asleep, wakefulness, et cetera. An important feature of this podcast, as you know, is that we dive deep into topics for several episodes at a time, at least a month at a time, so by stopping here, I recognize that there are probably many more questions that you still have, and the great thing about that is that we have another episode coming up soon, I'm going to hold office hours where I'm going to answer your specific questions about episodes one and two, so if you have questions about this episode, you have questions about episode one, write them down, put them in the comments, I'll also do a post on Instagram where you can put them in the comments there, but put them in the comments to this episode as well, please recommend the podcast if you like it, please subscribe to it here on YouTube, please subscribe to it on Apple, we're now on Spotify as well, recommend it to a friend, the community that we're creating here around these topics of sleep and wakefulness and other neuroscience- and health-related themes is best supported by your involvement and your questions, and so I'm going to be reading all of your questions, distilling those into the most commonly asked questions and liked questions, so if you see something below that you are particularly interested in, you don't have to put that question in again, you can just give it a like, the little thumbs-up tab, and if you're listening to this on Spotify or Apple, please go to YouTube, subscribe, and put your question there, or check out the Huberman Lab Instagram and you can put your questions there so that next episode, I can answer those questions and then we can move forward even more deeply into these critical topics around sleep and wakefulness so that you can be armed with all the information and resources that you need. Last but not least, a number of you have very graciously asked how you can support the podcast, the best way to support the podcast is to subscribe on YouTube or one of the other platforms, we are now on Spotify and Apple, and the other way you can really support the podcast is to check out our sponsors, which were discussed at the beginning. So thank you so much for your time and attention, and above all, thank you for your interest in science. (energetic music)

========================================

--- Video 348 ---
Video ID: H-XfCl-HpRM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H-XfCl-HpRM
Title: How Your Brain Works & Changes
Published: 2021-01-04 16:00:44 UTC
Description:
Today’s episode provides an introduction to how the nervous system works to create sensations, perceptions, emotions, thoughts and behaviors, as well as how we can change our nervous system— a phenomenon known as neuroplasticity.  

The information sets the stage for all Huberman Lab Podcast episodes that follow by covering neurons, synapses, brain chemicals and the rhythms that control our ability to focus, learn and sleep… and more. 
 
Timestamps for the episode can be found below. Thank you for your interest in science. We'll see you next week.

For an updated list of our current sponsors, please visit our website as previous sponsors mentioned in this podcast episode may no longer be affiliated with us: https://www.hubermanlab.com/sponsors

*Follow Huberman Lab*
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

*Timestamps*
0:00 Introduction
5:00 What is the Nervous System
8:55 Deja Vu 
10:50 How War, Guns & Soap Shaped Our Understanding of the Brain 
13:30 Jennifer Aniston Neurons 
14:30 Sensations 
16:10 Magnetic Sensing & Mating 
17:30 Perceptions & The Spotlight of Attention
18:30 Multi-Tasking Is Real 
20:10 Bottom-Up vs. Top-Down Control of Behavior 
21:15 Focusing the Mind 
21:55 Emotions + The Chemicals of Emotions 
24:30 Antidepressants 
27:40 Thoughts & Thought Control 
28:35 Actions 
33:20 How We Control Our Impulses
36:25 Neuroplasticity: The Holy Grail of Neuroscience 
41:20 The Portal to Neuroplasticity
46:40 Accelerating Learning in Sleep 
50:20 The Pillar of Plasticity 
55:00 Leveraging Ultradian Cycles & Self Experimentation 

#HubermanLab #Neuroscience

Disclaimer & Disclosures: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 349 ---
Video ID: 4b6bwcWK6GE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4b6bwcWK6GE
Title: Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast
Published: 2020-12-23 15:00:05 UTC
Description:
Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast. I am Dr. Andrew Huberman. 

My plan in creating this podcast is to discuss neuroscience: how our brain and its connections with the organs of our body controls our perceptions, our behaviors, and our health. I will also discuss tools for measuring and changing how our nervous system works.

Upcoming episodes will cover: sleep and how to get better at sleeping, learning, dreaming, as well as motivation and focus and how to access more focus. We will also cover neuroplasticity, fear, and stress.

Along the way, I will discuss behavioral tools ("do's and don'ts"), and the role of nutrition, exercise, supplements, prescription drugs and electronic devices for measuring and changing the way our nervous systems work.

To suggest additional topics, please enter them in the comment section below. Also, be sure to "like" any comments suggesting topics you're interested in. I will shape the content of future podcasts accordingly.

Thank you for your interest in science!

-Andrew

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

#HubermanLab

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Transcript Language: Arabic
- مرحبًا بكم في بث "هوبرمان لاب"، حيث نناقش العلم والأدوات العلمية للحياة اليومية. "هوبرمان لاب" مرحبًا. معكم "أندرو هوبرمان"، وأنا أستاذ في علم الأعصاب وطب العيون في كلية الطب بـ"ستانفورد". هذه وظيفتي اليومية، لكن خلال السنوات القليلة الماضية ازددت نشاطًا في تدريس علم الأعصاب والمواضيع المتعلقة به على وسائل التواصل الاجتماعي. كما أنني كنت محظوظًا كفايةً ليستضيفني العديد من أصحاب البث لمناقشة علم الأعصاب والأدوات المتعلقة به. من خلال هذه المناقشات وتعليقاتكم، قررت إطلاق بثًا حيث نتعمّق في موضوعات علمية والأدوات متعلقة بهذه المواضيع. تنسيق هذا البث سيكون مختلفًا قليلًا عن العديد من البث الذي يُقدم. ينتقل معظم البث من موضوع إلى آخر في كل حلقة أو يتغيّر الضيوف في كل حلقة. في بث "هوبرمان لاب"، سنتعمّق في الموضوعات الفردية لمدة شهر كامل في كل مرة. فمثلًا، قد يستغرق الأمر شهرًا كاملًا ونتعمّق في موضوع التحفيز والتركيز ونلمّ بكل ما يتعلق بالدوافع العلمية الكامنة وراء التركيز، المعروف وغير المعروف منها، ثم نناقش الأدوات المختلفة بجانب بعض العوائق التي تحول دون التحفيز والتركيز المعروفة كطريقة لفهم كيفية عمل هذه العمليات داخلك وداخل معارفك، وربما تتحسّن في بعض النواحي في أمور كالتحفيز والتركيز. أحيانًا، سأكون وحدي المتحدث إليكم. وأحيانًا أخرى سيكون ضيفًا هنا في الاستوديو معي، وأحيانًا أخرى قد نتواصل بالضيوف عن بُعد ونجري يمناقشات معهم عبر "زووم" أو أي برنامج آخر للتواصل. ثمة شيء آخر غير معتاد في هذا البث وهو أنك، إن اخترت، قد تكون مشاركًا نشطًا للغاية بتقديم اقتراحاتك حول الموضوعات التي يجب تغطيتها وما المعلومات التي ترغب في معرفة المزيد عنها في قسم التعليقات. سنولي اهتمامًا خاصًا لتلك التعليقات وعدد الإعجابات التي تتلقاها تلك التعليقات. لذا، إن قسم التعليقات هو مكان لك لتزويدنا بالنقد البناء، امدحنا إن أردت، ولكن الأهم من ذلك أنه سيكون مكانًا لتقديم اقتراحات حول ما تريد أن تسمع المزيد عنه، وسنردّ على ذلك. فإن كانت لديك اقتراحات لموضوعات الآن، فيُرجى كتابتها في قسم التعليقات أدناه. إن كنت ستأتي بعد قليل، يرجى التأييد أو التصويت لصالح المواضيع التي تريد أن تسمع المزيد عنها. وطبعًا لا تصوّت للمواضيع التي تودّ أن تسمع القليل عنها. هذه الملامح الرئيسية لهذا البث. كل شهر موضوع مختلف بشكل عميق وكذلك الأدوات التي تتعلق بهذا الموضوع. إنما أريد لفترة وجيزة أن أتطرق إلى ما أعنيه بالأدوات. أدوات هذه الأيام لتقوية الجهاز العصبي للفرد أو أي جانب من جوانب علم الأحياء وعلم النفس تأتي بأشكال مختلفة. يأتي بعضها في شكل أدوات سلوكية، لذا فإن الأشياء التي قد ترغب في القيام بها للحصول على نتيجة معينة. لنقل مثلًا: للتركيز أو تحسين النوم أو التعلم والمرونة. تتعلق الأدوات الأخرى بعدم القيام بأشياء معينة للحصول على نوم أفضل أو التركيز أو المرونة مثلًا. لا تزال هناك أدوات أخرى تتعلق بأشياء مثل التغذية أو المكملات أو الأدوية الموصوفة أو واجهة الآلة التي تستخدمها لمراقبة نظامك العصبي وعلم الأحياء، أو لتغيير نظامك العصبي وعلم الأحياء. سنناقش كل ذلك بجانب مزاياه وعيوبه المختلفة. مجددًا إذًا، يُرجى استخدام قسم التعليقات كمكان لتقديم الاقتراحات، وسننتبه إلى التعليقات، ولديك فرصة جادة لتشكيل اتجاه البث بشكل فعّال. ثمة شيء آخر غير مألوف في هذا البث وهو أن لديّ كلب كلب كبير جدًا يبلغ وزنه 40 كيلوغرام يُدعى "كوستيلو" ويصرّ على الشخير... في الخلفية بينما أسجّل. يبدو أنه تصرفه المفضل. لذلك من وقت لآخر، قد تسمع شخيره أو همهمات أخرى وأشياء مختلفة تشبه أصوات الكلاب. إنه مشارك نشط في "هوبرمان لاب" وعضو ثابت في البث، فيمكنك أن تطلّع لمزيد من أصوات "كوستيلو" في المستقبل. أخيرًا، ولكن بالتأكيد ليس آخرًا، أنا أقدّر اهتمامك بالعلوم كثيرًا والمواضيع ذات الصلة بالعلوم. شكرًا جزيلًا على وقتك واهتمامك، وأتطلّع إلى رؤيتك هنا مجددًا عن قريب. "علم الأعصاب بث " "كلية الطب بـ "

========================================

