--- YouTube Channel Transcript Export ---
Channel: Andrew Huberman (ID: UC2D2CMWXMOVWx7giW1n3LIg)
Export Date: 2025-05-12 14:40:28
Total Videos Found (in channel): 349
Preferred Languages: en
--- Videos starting from 158th in this file ---
========================================

--- Video 158 ---
Video ID: nDLb8_wgX50
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nDLb8_wgX50
Title: David Goggins: How to Build Immense Inner Strength
Published: 2024-01-01 13:00:36 UTC
Description:
In this episode, my guest is David Goggins, retired Navy SEAL, highly accomplished ultramarathoner, best-selling author, and influential public speaker.

David explains how he mastered his inner dialogue to build extraordinary levels of discipline and mental and physical toughness.

He describes how confronting his early hardships, including physical and mental abuse, learning disorders, and obesity, became a practice of deep and excruciating self-reflection — eventually allowing him to transmute those experiences into a superhuman work ethic.

This conversation is a unique window into David Goggins’ process in that it focuses both on the underlying science and how David manages and directs his inner dialogue.

It’s a conversation that will inform and inspire anyone wondering how exactly to go about building discipline and confidence and reach their potential.
 
Note: This conversation includes profanity. Some content might not be suitable for all audiences and ages.

Access the full show notes for this episode: https://go.hubermanlab.com/emxCgmM

Use Ask Huberman Lab, our chat-based tool, for summaries, clips, and insights from this episode: https://go.hubermanlab.com/g9nj7p

*Thank you to our sponsors*
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Maui Nui Venison: https://mauinuivenison.com/huberman 
AeroPress: https://aeropress.com/pages/huberman 
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman 
Momentous: https://livemomentous.com/huberman 

*Huberman Lab Social & Website*
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

*David Goggins*
Website: https://davidgoggins.com 
Books: https://davidgoggins.com/book
Merchandise: https://shop.davidgoggins.com 
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/davidgoggins
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/iamdavidgoggins 
X: https://twitter.com/davidgoggins 

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 David Goggins
00:03:22 Sponsors: Maui Nui, AeroPress & Eight Sleep
00:07:58 Learning, Studying & Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
00:14:59 Writing & Learning, ADHD & Focus
00:20:35 Friction, Focus, “Conqueror’s Mindset”
00:25:16 Early Hardships, “Haunted”
00:30:48 Anger, Social Media; Growth & Challenges
00:36:14 Sponsor: AG1
00:37:11 Stick vs. Carrot, Negative Inner Dialogue, “Stay Hard”
00:42:39 Inspiration, Characters & Self Image
00:46:09 Willpower & Anterior Mid-Cingulate Cortex
00:53:23 Friction & the “Suck”, Willpower
00:59:14 Building Willpower, Brain & “No Days Off” Mentality 
01:08:52 Sponsor: InsideTracker
01:09:54 Losing Weight, Challenge & Willpower
01:18:47 Self-Criticism & Discipline; Recovery; Stutter & Building Confidence
01:26:45 Relationships & Honest Conversations, People Pleasing
01:34:49 Self-Reflection & Empowerment
01:39:06 Unseen Work, Real Passion & Purpose, Medicine Cabinet Analogy
01:46:32 Feeling Lost, Self-Reflection & Individual Process 
01:54:11 Challenges & Two Internal Voices, Misunderstood
01:59:32 Running, Smoke Jumping; Success; Willpower & Perishable Skills
02:07:04 Self-Reflection & Action, Distractions
02:15:27 Inner Dialogue; Failing Properly
02:24:59 Introspection & Unconscious Mind, Cleaning “Cupboards”
02:35:19 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify & Apple Reviews, YouTube Feedback, Sponsors,  Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

#HubermanLab #DavidGoggins

Disclaimer: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English
ANDREW HUBERMAN: Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [MUSIC PLAYING] I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guest today is David Goggins. David Goggins is a retired Navy SEAL who served in Iraq and Afghanistan. He's also a highly accomplished ultramarathon runner. For those of you that don't know, ultramarathons are distances longer than 26 miles and, in David's case, often longer than 200 miles. For his achievements in athletics, he has been inducted into the International Sports Hall of Fame. He also held a Guinness World Record for the most pull-ups completed in 24 hours. I should mention that not only was David a decorated Navy SEAL, but he also graduated from Army Ranger School. David is also a highly successful writer, having authored two books, the first entitled "Can't Hurt Me" and the second entitled "Never Finished," both of which are best sellers. David's books cover many topics, including his autobiographical description of what can only be described as an incredibly challenging child and young adulthood. His home was abusive. His school environment was abusive. He essentially had no positive resources directed his way and. In his 20s, he found himself to be obese, that is, more than 300 pounds working a job he despised for minimal pay. And it was at that point that David began an inner dialogue that forced him to explore the demons born out of his childhood but also the position that he found himself in as a young man and then began the journey to navigate that dialogue and transform himself into the Navy SEAL, the ultramarathon runner, the bestselling author, and the extraordinarily positive and influential man that he is today. As some of you may know, David has done various public lectures. He's a familiar face online because there are so many clips of him on YouTube. And he has done podcasts before. However, I'm certain that you'll find today's discussion to be very different than previous podcasts that David has been featured on. The reason is that-- of course, we get into his accomplishments. We talk about the mindset that allowed him to achieve those things. But, today, David really lets us under the hood. He lets us into the form of inner dialogue that he has to embrace, indeed that he has to grapple with on a daily basis, sometimes multiple times throughout the day and night in order to impose the sort of self-discipline that he is so well known for. We also get into some of the scientific mechanisms underlying willpower. And we talk about David's current endeavors that include, for instance, his own exploration of science and medicine for which he has become an intense scholar and practitioner. I should mention that multiple times throughout today's discussion you will hear curse words. Now David and I both acknowledge that cursing isn't for everybody and that cursing itself is different than cursing at somebody. Nonetheless, we do realize that many people, parents perhaps especially, might not want to hear cursing. If you don't want to hear cursing, well, then this podcast episode is probably not for you. However, if you are comfortable with cursing or if you can tolerate it, I assure you today's discussion is highly worthwhile. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Maui Nui Venison. Maui Nui Venison is the most nutrient dense and delicious red meat available. I've spoken before on this podcast and there's general consensus that most people should strive to consume approximately 1 gram of protein per pound of body weight. Now when one strives to do that, it's important to maximize the quality of that protein intake to the calorie ratio because you don't want to consume an excess of calories when trying to get that 1 gram of protein per pound of body weight. Maui Nui Venison has an extremely high quality protein to calorie ratio. So it makes getting that 1 gram of protein per pound of body weight extremely easy. It's also delicious. Personally, I like the ground venison. I also like the venison steaks. And then for convenience when I'm on the road, I like the jerky. The jerky has a very high protein to calorie ratio. So it has as much as 10 grams of protein per jerky stick, and it has something like only 55 calories, so, again, making it very easy to get enough protein without consuming excess calories. If you would like to try Maui Nui Venison, you can go to mauinuivenison.com/huberman to get 20% off your first order. Again, that's mauinuivenison.com/huberman to get 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by AeroPress. AeroPress is similar to a French press for making coffee, but it is, in fact, a much better way to make coffee. I first learned about AeroPress well over 10 years ago. And I've been using one ever since. AeroPress was developed by Alan Adler, who was an engineer at Stanford. And I knew of Alan because he had also built the so-called Aerobie Frisbee, which I believe at one time, perhaps still now, held the Guinness Book of World Records for furthest thrown object. And I used to see Alan, believe it or not, at parks around Palo Alto testing out different Aerobie Frisbees. So he was sort of famous in our community for developing these different feats of engineering that turned into commercial products. Now I love coffee. I'm somebody that drinks coffee nearly every day, usually about 90 to 120 minutes after I wake up in the morning, although not always. Sometimes if I'm going to exercise, I'll drink coffee first thing in the morning. But I love, love, love coffee. And what I've personally found is that by using the AeroPress, I can make the best possible tasting cup of coffee. I don't know what exactly it is in the AeroPress that allows the same beans to be prepared into a cup of coffee that tastes that much better as compared to any other form of brewing that coffee, even the traditional French press. The AeroPress is extremely easy to use. And it's extremely compact. In fact, I take it with me whenever I travel. And I use it on the road, in hotels, even on planes. I'll just ask for some hot water, and I'll brew my coffee or tea right there on the plane. If you'd like to try AeroPress, you can go to aeropress.com/huberman. That's A-E-R-O-P-R-E-S-S dotcom slash Huberman to get 20% off any aeropress coffeemaker. AeroPress ships anywhere in the USA, Canada, and over 60 other countries around the world. Again, that's aeropress.com/huberman to get 20% off. Today's episode is also brought to us by Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. I've spoken many times before on this podcast about the fact that sleep is the foundation of mental health, physical health, and performance. Now a key component of getting a great night's sleep is that in order to fall and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3 degrees. And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3 degrees. One of the best ways to make sure that those temperature changes occur at the appropriate times, at the beginning and throughout and at the end of your night when you wake up, is to control the temperature of your sleeping environment. And that's what Eight Sleep allows you to do. It allows you to program the temperature of your mattress and sleeping environment such that you fall and stay deeply asleep easily and wake up each morning feeling incredibly refreshed and energized. I've been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress cover for almost three years now. And it has dramatically improved the quality of my sleep. If you'd like to try Eight Sleep, you can go to eightsleep.com/huberman to get $150 off their Pod 3 mattress cover. Eight Sleep currently ships in the USA, Canada, UK, select countries in the EU, and Australia. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman. And now for my discussion with David Goggins. David Goggins, welcome. DAVID GOGGINS: My man. Good to see you again, man. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Great to see you. It was late 2016, early 2017, I believe, when you were in my lab at Stanford. DAVID GOGGINS: Yes sir. ANDREW HUBERMAN: We did a little work later that day down in San Jose. And, gosh, see you everywhere, but it's not enough. So great to have you here. DAVID GOGGINS: Thanks for having me on, brother. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah. You embody discipline and doing hard things. I think we should just start right off with-- DAVID GOGGINS: Yeah. Let's just go there. ANDREW HUBERMAN: --the bold truth. But right before we went hot mics, we were talking about learning. Right now, you're spending some time learning and doing things that I think most people probably don't typically associate David Goggins with. DAVID GOGGINS: Right. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Why don't you tell us about that? DAVID GOGGINS: Well, most people just look at me as the guy that runs and yells as he's running. While I do that to motivate people, but people don't understand that my day is broken up into segments. I work out. I eat. I sleep, but I spend most of my time studying. So like I'm in the medical world. I'm a paramedic in Canada. But I spend a lot of my time trying to nuke every single thing about it because I'm not trying to just be a paramedic, learn about veins, and arteries, and how the heart pumps, and stuff like that. I'm trying to learn to the point where I can save someone's life. And even though paramedics are doing that all over the world, I'm trying to be that paramedic that can really dissect exactly what's going on and figure out what medication goes where, just trying to learn the algorithm of what's going on, man. So I spent a lot of time with it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I love the word algorithm because when I teach biology or try and learn anything that's related to biology and especially the human body, I need to know the nouns. But it's the verbs that matter. And that's really what you're talking about. Just saying that sits there, that brain part there, doesn't tell you how it all works together. So what does your process for studying look like? If we dropped a camera in the room, brought a microphone into your inner dialogue-- gosh, wouldn't we all love that. But if we dropped a microphone into your inner dialogue, are you waking up looking at the books and going, yeah, fresh day, let's learn or is some of the same resistance that you've talked about coming up around physical work, is that coming up from time to time? DAVID GOGGINS: You know what, I was nervous at first. I'm going to keep it real. I'm going to keep it real. So I'm not a real smart guy. And what I mean by that is I was born with ADD, ADHD. Like my brain cannot retain information. I'm not some genetic freak when it comes to running, when it comes to lifting weights. I am absolutely the bottom of the barrel. And people will never believe me. And they can just whatever. Believe what you want to believe. So when you ask me this question about what does studying look like for me, I have to go over the same page over, and over, and over, and over again, while Jennifer can look at that page while she's quizzing me, she'll learn it right then as she's-- she didn't know anything about it. She will quiz herself or quiz me and learn it as she's quizzing me. It's the most frustrating thing in the world how my brain works. So what I do is I literally sit there with a pen and paper. And I have my books. And I go through and have to write everything down every single day. I will study the same page until it's photographic memory from writing the same thing down. And then from there, I'll go back through and relearn it again. So I'll learn the bulk of it. But then I'll go through and learn the small things within that. So if it's a medication, I'll learn what the medication does. First, I'll learn how to even say the medication because these medications aren't like albuterol. No, it's very big words. So I'll go through, learn how to say the name. Then I'll go through learn what the dose is. Then I'll go through-- and this is like every single day. So it's not like, oh, I got it. Let's just go through-- no, nothing is I got it. Every single thing-- so I can't wait to get in this conversation because everything I do in life, it sucks. Everything I do in life, it sucks. That's why when I was 300 pounds and 24 years old, it wasn't like I had some big epiphany of let's just go be a Navy SEAL, and let's lose some weight. No, I knew my entire life was going to be a struggle, which is why I just ignored it. And I said, I'm not even trying to jump off any of this shit and learn how to read, how to write, how to memorize, how to become something I am not. But through that process, something happened to me. And I realized-- this is why I feel sorry for no one. In this podcast, they're going to really not like me because people are going to think that I am maybe lying or maybe fibbing or exaggerating. No, I am literally-- I was the lowest form on Earth, no talent, no ability to learn. And I literally know what it is to be rock bottom and to build that up. So that question about learning is the pain in my ass. And I don't have to do it. Just think about it. I'm 49 years old, and I'm a multi-millionaire. I don't have to do anything. So all I thought about when I was growing up is, man, I can't wait to one day get to the point where I no longer have to do this stuff. But what happened as I got older, it became a way of living. So how I do every day is how I do every day. It's a discipline. It's a regimen. It was a choice I made. And the choice I made was what are you willing to sacrifice, and what are you willing to give up to find every bit of who you are as a human being? And I was willing to give up everything to do that. So studying is no joke. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I love that you're studying. I recall a few years ago, I heard some interview or podcast with you. And you just threw out like I don't know what I'll do next. Maybe I'll be a scientist. And I went yeah. Because I knew-- because I know you a bit. And I see your work out there, but we had met before, that if you decided that you were going to do it-- and learning medicine, which is what you're doing, learning human physiology is so detailed. DAVID GOGGINS: Very. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And people out there have to understand when you look at a textbook and you see the veins and the capillaries different colors, when the body is open, they're not different colors. DAVID GOGGINS: Right, right, right. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So I mean, some things have different color contrasts, but it's not like it's all labeled when you pop it open. DAVID GOGGINS: Exactly. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And so the process of writing things down by hand is important for you. So you go back and read those notes. Do you think about that stuff on your runs too or are you segmenting your day like when you're done studying, are you heading out for a run and thinking about other things? Or are you still rehearsing the material in your head? DAVID GOGGINS: So when I write it down, I write it down, and I'm able to-- I'm actually looking down at this table right now because I'm back to writing. So I'm actually there right now as I'm speaking to you. I write it down in a way that I'm memorizing page 69. So I'm writing it down. So then writing it down and that page sync together in my brain. So I'm looking at the book in my brain right now. That's just how it works for me. And I have to do it over and over again. So that page is stuck in my mind. So I'm literally flipping through pages as I'm taking these tests. And I'm taking these national tests to become a paramedic or become an advanced EMT or whatever. I'm literally as I'm taking that test I'm going through. And I'm like-- now I'm flipping pages in my head where that page was. And how I do that is just from how I write it and how it's on the page. When I run, I can't recall any of it. I cannot bring any of that because I'm running. How my mind is wired now is that everything I do is what I do. Because the focus it takes for me to-- right now, I'm running. I'm not like a great runner. I'm not like injury free. So like my first 20 minutes of the run I'm limping. I'm literally limping because I've had several knee surgeries. And my body was twisted. And so now it's untwisting. So people look at me, oh, looks, like he's limping when he runs. I am limping when I run. My body is jacked up so I'm focusing on how to get the best out of a broken body. So everything I do is a total focus on what I'm doing at that point in my life. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So it seems like you've really trained away or somehow gotten away from the ADD that you mentioned because what you described is like a deep trench. It's like a V shaped trench. I'm imagining like there's a ball bearing, and it's like, phewp, and it can only go forward in that trench or back. And it goes forward. It's not like sliding around at the concave at the bottom, zip-zip-zip, like a tension. So it's like you trained that up. Is there a similar feeling when you're in the full focus of running versus full focus of studying? Does it kind of feel like, oh yeah, that's the same groove but different thing or is it just completely different world? DAVID GOGGINS: It's a completely different world. Both of them for me is suffering, but it's suffering a whole different way. Like when I was going through school, I never forget-- I think I was in third grade. And back then, ADD, ADHD, wasn't like here's this medicine or here's this thing. They want to put you in a special school. So for me, I was so far behind in learning that their big thing was let's just put him in a special school because he'll never learn. And through that process of like I don't want to be in a special school, I don't want to be treated any differently, it really-- like I never took medication. I've never taken medication for this. That's why right now you see me looking right in your eyes. What the hell is Huberman saying right now. And that's why I don't feel bad for people who have ADHD, who have learning disabilities. And some are impossible because you just can't. But a lot of them you can. But people don't want to go through the process of focus, of teaching yourself how to truly focus. This is where my message gets lost. It gets lost because I may say MF or F because that's the passion that comes out of me. It takes everything for me to learn a sentence. So when I speak about David Goggins, I can't speak about David Goggins in a way that's just calm and cool. Because when I wake up, I know the journey that it takes for me to find my greatness. And it's hard. Nothing is easy. Nothing just like, oh, I wake up, and I just do this or I do that or it just-- no, I watch people every day go through life, and it's so easy. For me to be where I'm at today, it takes every bit of me. So when I speak about it, and as I get going here, you'll start seeing me-- the tempo will rise. The passion will come out because I'm back there. I'm doing what I do every day to become a human being. And so nothing is easy. Like running is running. It sucks. But you have a choice to make. Do you want to sit down and go back to that guy you once were? No. So this is what it takes. It takes that misunderstanding of people. And they'll never get it because they were never David Goggins. So that is what it takes for me to do what I do. It may take you something differently. So for me, everything has to be in the study. Everything has to be into this. Everything has to be in-- everywhere I am it has to be there, me, focused where I am. That's why you're my second podcast I've done since Rogan, since the book came out. I don't have time for that shit because if I want to be great, I'm not trying to maximize money or maximize people knowing me. I do these things because maybe someone out there will understand me and get it and say, I can grow from this guy, and others just won't. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Sounds like friction is something you're very familiar with. It's a word just I feel like is like cast above us right now in bold face, highlighted, underlined letters. DAVID GOGGINS: Friction is growth. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Friction, like you're up in the morning. And I imagine David Goggins going to the coffee maker, stretching out, good morning, sunshine. And you're telling me from eyelids open there's friction. DAVID GOGGINS: Yes, and that is the thing that people don't-- they don't fucking get. The biggest misunderstanding about David Goggins of all time-- it's like whether you believe in God or not-- I do-- he put this lab rat, which is me, on this planet and said let me fucking see what a beat up, abused kid who can barely learn, barely learn, who has a twisted body, messed up genetics, sickle cell, this and that, let me give him everything that pretty much disqualifies you from the military. But back then, it wasn't as-- and let's put him in this and see what comes out of it. So to do that, friction-- you don't wake up in the morning time and go to the coffee maker. Matter of fact, sometimes you don't even sleep. What it requires is when I'm at-- 2 o'clock-- it's 2 o'clock in the morning. And my brain is thinking about a fucking drug. And I got to get up and look in my book to see what that drug is, how I remember it. And this is every day of my fucking life. That's why when I train a fighter or I train someone, I'm like, you have no fucking idea how great you really are because you are using such minimal, minimal of what you have. And if people can learn to focus, this is what's possible. While it may not be pretty-- like people want to do a documentary on me. I go no. I don't want to do a documentary on me because I will have normal everyday people picking me apart. Oh, his life is miserable. Who wants to live like that? It's crazy how he-- it's almost like he's sick. He's psychotic. The most frustrating thing in the world for me is when normal people judge a man like myself on what it really takes to extract greatness from nothing. It takes every bit of who you are if you choose that route. If you don't, Merry Christmas, do what you got to do. But, yeah, all these things for me-- like I told you, man, I'm going to keep it real. I'm not coming here to talk about perform without purpose because I go through-- when I write these books, I go through, I try to dumb down David Goggins. How can I give normal people-- and I'm normal. But I found something that most don't want to find. How can I speak to people and give them something from this crazy psychotic brain that I've developed? How can I give them that? So I sit down with Jennifer for years and write down perform without purpose, callus your mind, armor your mind, the cookie jar, the accountability mirror, shit that people can fucking use in their lives. No, no, I'm glad it helps you. But the barbaric life that I live that you have to live, the almost obsession that you must have to be great, you can't put that shit in a fucking book, bro. You can't put in a book. You can't. You can't write about it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It has to be experienced. DAVID GOGGINS: It has to be experienced. And you can't even-- after you experience it, to write it in the book, it would seem like he needs to be locked up. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Too gory. DAVID GOGGINS: It's too gory. Doesn't make sense for a guy that everything, every second of the day he is trying to extract more from something. He's constantly thinking. He's constantly, constantly disciplined, never going off the path. Whatever is injured on him, he figures away. It's a conquerors mindset. And very few people, if any, can really understand what that is. Like I'm almost 50. And I've been this way for almost 30 years. Like what do you do for fun? These questions, I don't get them. I don't understand them. I don't-- so yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I get asked that sometimes, what do you do for fun. I start listing off all this stuff like podcasting, reading, working out. So some of that resonates. But I think what's so truly unusual about what you're describing, your process is that from go it's hard. And I have to ask was being 300 pounds, having essentially-- I'm using the words you've described. DAVID GOGGINS: No, do it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: You've said it before. You had a tendency at one point in your life early on tell lies, try and get people's approval. DAVID GOGGINS: Lied my ass off. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Crazy haircuts, attention seeking, and yet all of that triggered something that now is extraordinary. Do you think those hardships were necessary to flip the switch? DAVID GOGGINS: I don't know if they were necessary, but it was something that made me feel-- I didn't feel good. It was easy. The brain that I was given as a child, it was easy to go home and think about, how do I want to be a freak today? How do I want to show up to school today and be a freak? It didn't require me going home and opening a book up saying, it's going to take me all year to learn this fucking page. So instead of learning that page, I learned how to become a character. And maybe that character that I created, that 300 pound, insecure guy that used to fake it till I make it type of guy, let me become your friend, let me lie to you until you like me type of guy-- when you have any manhood, womanhood, a human being, a soul, a spirit, any-- I must have just this much pride because that's exactly what opened the door for me. Because every day, you were a character. Every day, you were a clown. Every day, you opened that Spanish book or that science book or English book, and you looked at it. It looked like a foreign language. And you're saying, where do I start? Where do I start? And, obviously, it was necessary. The more I talk about it, it was necessary because what happened is I became haunted by the mere fact that this is my existence. And you got to live with that. And I lived with it for a lot of years. And so I sat back and said, OK, all right, I know what this takes. And when you sit back, as fucked up as I was-- and I had a laundry list, a table like this of what I have to do to become just a human being that can make ends meet, that can make $1,000 a month. Just to get there was like, oh my god, dude, like how-- I'm 16, 17, I can't read. I can't write. Oh my god, I'm so behind the power curve. And my brain is about being depressed. And my dad beat-- my mom's not home. And kids are calling me nigger at school. And I'm like, oh my god, man, what the fuck do I do? And it wasn't like someone came around and said, hey, man, you can do this. This is all me. Some people want to know where does this cold man come from. I'm not trying to be cold. It's the reality of my life. It's the reality of a lot of people's lives. And so, yeah, that had to happen for me to be haunted, to be haunted, to pull out, to extract the guy that I am today. That haunting is something that's still there today because no matter how much you improve, no matter how much you change who you are, it's not permanent. You don't just wake up and say, oh my god, man, you're David Goggins. You break records. You do this. You do that. People want to know, how are you able to just be so hard? Because I never turn the fucking thing off. Because once it turns off, I go right back to the David Goggins that is. And that's the guy that I'm constantly fighting every day. And it's a choice. And that choice makes you misunderstood. It makes you crazy. That's why I hate fucking social media. In 2013, people wanted me to write my book. I did it in 2018. Took five years. And the reason why I didn't do it-- I sat at the table, and Jennifer was there. This was before she started working for me, I started dating her or whatever. And all these people were there. And they're like, man, you got to go on social media. And I was like, fuck you, man. It's poison. It's poison because I knew what I did to get where I am. And I'm going to have these people, these normal, everyday people, fat, lazy, exactly who I was judging me. Because I know it because I was once them. All my hard work, all my dedication, I'm going to have some normal dude get his little brownie, his little Ding Dong, Ho Ho, Twinkie, sit there with his coffee picking me apart. Oh, he must be unhappy. Do you know how hard it is to put these shoes on every damn morning? And I'm gonna have you pick me apart? So, yeah, there's so much that goes into this that I was like fuck this. I never wanted anything to do with it. So anyway. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I'm not a psychologist. But knowing your story from what you've written, what you've said on social media, and elsewhere, podcasts and here now especially, it's amazing to me, and, frankly, it pulls at my heartstrings a little bit I realize that's not what you're trying to do but that in the course of your childhood and in your young adulthood that no one ever got between you and the world. I forget where I heard it that if a kid has just one person that believes in them-- and I had my trials and tribulations. But I had great coaches, great mentors. I attached to them. I found them if they didn't necessarily find me. But I'm realizing that your situation was no one's ever said, hey, I'm going to stand here next to you or get in front of you, put a shield up. And so it's almost like you've got these different-- it's all you, but there's versions of yourself-- that like you knew social media-- like I don't know that I have the wherewithal in 2013 '14, '15, '16, '17 to get in front of myself while doing all this because I've already got so much going on in here. Is that about right? DAVID GOGGINS: That is right. But I had developed a lot of anger. And I still have it. And it will never go away for the normal human beings of this world because when you put yourself in the sewer like I was in-- and please, if someone saved me, come out and announce it to the world. There was no one. There's no one. So when you know that-- and then I'm sitting at the table with all these smart people who are telling me what to do and shit and guiding me through my life now when I'm 40 fucking years old. It's 2000-- I don't know 40-something years old. Now I'm 49. And I'm looking at them all. And they're now trying to guide me on what's right on this poison. And so, yeah, what you say is right. But for me, it was more of I know now. I don't need you to guide my future. I know what's good for me and what's bad for me. And for me, it took every bit of focus I could. And I know social media-- that's why people love to go on there because they want to show you the good side of life. I'm not teaching good side of life. So I had to figure out a way when I came on 2016 of teaching you what life really is for the majority of us is hell. And so while people love to show you the cars, and the house, and the vacations and shit, all that's good. All that's happy. I'm going to show you the side that I know most of you are going through. And people hide very well. I don't want to hide anymore. I hid it for 24 fucking years. So that's why now when I told you we can talk about whatever you want because as human beings, the first thing we have to learn-- I also stuttered real bad growing up. So if you hear me stutter every now and then, it's because that was part of my life also. So it's funny. Human beings want to show you the best side. And they want to hide the worst side. For me, I'm going to teach you how to be vulnerable because that's the only way you fix yourself. You don't fix yourself by coming out here and me selling you some fucking books. That's why I don't have them. I forgot them. I'm glad people got something from the book. I want you to learn that the only way you grow is how to look at yourself and say, OK, like I did, table longer than this, what the fuck I have to do to get somewhere? There was nothing good on there, nothing. Yeah, I loved playing basketball. I left that out. That's something I love to do. I don't care about that. That didn't make the fucking list because the list that I had to live by was the very list that was going to get me at this table with you to talk to you to the normal human beings, which I once was, about how you can get somewhere and how it looks. It looks very ugly. There's no fucking passion. There's no fucking motivation. There's no, oh my god, man, I fucking-- no, it's every day of your life just doing, no passion, no discipline, no motivation, all these words. I hate that so many people fucking use these words now because it's watered. Someone sitting in the room by themselves and they figure themselves out and say, god, this is going to fucking suck. Where's passion when you're 300 pounds? Where's the motivation when you can't read and write? Where is it? So how did this happen? I just fucking did. I just did. I said maybe at the end of this journey, there will be something there for me. If not, I can read. If not, I'm 185 fucking pounds. There was no magic potion. There was no, oh, let me wake up and look at some shit. No. All those words are overused. They're bullshit. It's all bullshit. Just do. You're living. How do you want to live? How do you want to die? How do you want to fucking be remembered? That's it. That's it. Period. ANDREW HUBERMAN: As many of you know, I've been taking AG1 daily since 2012. So I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. AG1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that's designed to meet all of your foundational nutrition needs. Now, of course, I try to get enough servings of vitamins and minerals through whole foods sources that include vegetables and fruits every day. But, oftentimes, I simply can't get enough servings. But with AG1, I'm sure to get enough vitamins, and minerals, and the probiotics that I need. And it also contains adaptogens to help buffer stress. Simply put, I always feel better when I take AG1. I have more focus and energy, and I sleep better. And it also happens to taste great. For all these reasons, whenever I'm asked if you could take just one supplement what would it be, I answer AG1. If you'd like to try AG1, go to drinkag1.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs plus a year's supply of vitamin D3, K2. Again, that's drinkag1.com/huberman. The word haunted is ringing in my head. DAVID GOGGINS: Yep. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I think it's such a powerful word. DAVID GOGGINS: Yep. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Because I was about to m it seems like a huge part of your process, maybe the entire process, is it's all stick no carrot, you talk about the carrot, the positive thing. And then there's the stick, the thing you're trying to avoid. I feel like it's-- the way it's landing for me is it's all stick and gas pedal. DAVID GOGGINS: That's it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: There's no carrot. You're not imagining, oh, when I'm a paramedic, when the book is published. And, obviously, you set those goals, and you make those targets. But it's all stick. DAVID GOGGINS: All stick. ANDREW HUBERMAN: No carrot. DAVID GOGGINS: Think about that. I'm waking up right now studying. Like I have a test tomorrow. I already passed the fucking test. Think about that. Every day in my life, that's what I must do just to retain what I learned. Four hours plus a day, I go through and do that. There's no stick. Or there's only a stick. There's never been a carrot, which is why when I speak to people, I have to figure out a way to resonate with them. Because all I want to say to them is let me teach you the real life, how it really is. The reason why you're a loser and the reason why you're not fucking making it and the reason why you're trying to go to all these-- I go to all these fucking conventions, speak all the fucking time. I look in the fucking audience. And these people sign up, sign up, sign up fucking every year go to a convention, thinking they're going to learn something fucking different. No, you're lazy. You know exactly what to do, exactly what to do. Because even me in my state of I can't read and write, I knew exactly what to do. It just sucks doing it. It sucks to do it. It sucks to wake up every morning of your life and say, god, man, I'm not smart. So guess what I got to do. I got to study the same shit that I got one of the highest scores in the nation on and do it again, and do it again, and do it again. It's not just there. It's not just there permanently for me. So, yeah, it's all stick. It's all stick. The only carrot you have is like maybe, maybe. Because whenever I take these tests that are real hard, the back of my brain is like a good chance you're not going to make it, Goggins. This ain't you, bro. This ain't you. You weren't born like this. This ain't you. The real you, bro-- study all you want to. But the second that fucking computer comes on with 150 questions, this ain't you, man. And somehow, comes back. I passed. I passed again, passed again. But that real me back here every fucking time is saying that ain't you, bro. That ain't you. And I have to outwork that voice. When I'm taking that test and I get to a question I don't fucking know the answer, I'm like fuck, man. And then say, see I told you, man. That ain't you. You're 300 pounds, man. You sit at home. You figure out how to do your hair. That's what you do, how to come to school with the reverse baldness when you're 16. That's you. So there is no get out of jail free card. This is why I say stay hard. Because when you weren't given the gifts, the only thing you can do in life is stay hard. And I know people cannot stand me. They can't stand this talk. This is all you can do. There's no magic pill or a magic potion. All you can do is outwork the man that God created or woman in you. And what that looks like is unfun. That's why I said, do not do a documentary on me because people will not see the truth. They will see what they want to see is I don't want to live like that. Good, good. And you will live exactly the way you live now, questioning who you are, wondering what is possible, wondering what you are capable of doing. That's how that looks or you can be me, which am I happy? I don't know. Never really thought about it. Don't really care about it because all I really cared about was when I looked in that fucking mirror, I saw a piece of shit. Happiness wasn't on the mirror at 16 or when I was 300 pounds. It wasn't like, I'm looking for happiness. No, I'm looking at myself in the mirror and say, all right, motherfucker, you did it again today. You're a bad boy because that shit sucks. I have about a couple of minutes of that that I got the carrot. The second I lay down and go to bed, the carrots gone because I'm waking up all through the night to check the work I did that day. Did I get this drug right? Did I get this right? Did I get that right? What did I do? Oh my god, fuck, I'm already losing it. Stick. ANDREW HUBERMAN: That stick's haunting you. DAVID GOGGINS: Haunting me. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It's following you around. So no picture of Jordan on the wall. You're not listening to YouTube inspiration video. DAVID GOGGINS: No. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Those would be all your voice anyway. [LAUGHTER] You're not listening to your top 10 favorite songs just to get rolling and then lace the shoes, hit the books. It's all in here. DAVID GOGGINS: All in there. I used to do that when I was fat. Rocky, I mean, that was my thing. Round 14 was my thing. And as I got older and older and older, that started to go away. And I started to create-- I had all these people that I used to watch. Rocky was one, Barnes, Elias from "Platoon," Jack from "A Few Good Men" when he's on the stand going crazy. I saw a lot of these characters that I looked at and I was like, man, I ain't got none of that. But they were characters. After a while, I lived a life so disciplined that every body that I once looked to, these fake characters, I built that as a man. And when I was younger, I had this image in my mind of what does a man look like to me? And I got all these people who are badasses, characters. And in my mind, I became that. And that's what kept me going a lot was I had this pipe dream of becoming a little bit of this and a little bit of that because when you have no parents raising you and you have no role models growing up, it's not daydreaming. You start to create a reality like, mm, maybe I can be that. And after becoming this guy, that is the biggest thing I can ever do in my life is I became that guy. That I once looked at all these, guys and now I look at myself like, god, who the fuck can do that? I can. But what it takes is a discipline that no one can ever even-- they don't understand it. They don't understand it. But everybody has the ability to do it, but they just don't want to. They want to keep asking questions and keep going to seminars. And the greatness is right in you. And that's why once again-- I say this a million times here, I do not feel sorry for you. I will not sugarcoat what I'm going to say to you because all of you know what I'm saying is the truth. Everybody knows it's the truth. This is what it looks like. And you know it too. You know it too. If you ain't got nothing, I hate to tell you what it looks like. It's ugly. It's not a documentary. It's not an HBO special. You ain't going to watch me like, hey, man, you guys gotta watch this. No, it's like, oh, god, this looks like a train wreck. It's like a nightmare. This looks like this guy's got-- no, that's what it looks like. Hard work looks horrible. It's not motivating. It's not motivating at all. It ain't like Rocky round 14 where he gets knocked down and goes like this to Apollo Creed. Looks like a man being stuck in a fucking dungeon. And there's no fucking way out. But you have the fucking key. But you refuse to use it. And that's nothing motivating about that. So, yes, no documentary on David Goggins. ANDREW HUBERMAN: The real life-- DAVID GOGGINS: The real life. ANDREW HUBERMAN: --David Goggins is the documentary. It's already being written. You're it. DAVID GOGGINS: Right. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah, I'm going to share a little neuroscience tidbit. DAVID GOGGINS: Love it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: But I think it's one that you'll appreciate. Most people don't know this, but there's a brain structure called the anterior mid-cingulate cortex. As we pointed out before, that's a noun. It's a name. It doesn't mean anything. We could call it the Cookie Monster. But what's interesting about this brain area is there are now a lot of data in humans, not some mouse study, showing that when people do something they don't want to do like add three hours of exercise per day or per week or when people who are trying to diet and lose weight resist eating something, when people do anything that they, and this is the important part, that they don't want to do, it's not about adding more work. It's about adding more work that you don't want to do. This brain area gets bigger. Now here's what's especially interesting about this brain area to me. And by the way, I'm only learning this recently because it's new data. But there's a lot of it. The anterior mid-cingulate cortex is smaller in obese people. It gets bigger when they diet. It's larger in athletes. It's especially large or grows larger in people that see themselves as challenged and overcome some challenge. And in people that live a very long time, this area keeps its size. In many ways, scientists are starting to think of the anterior mid-cingulate cortex not just as one of the seats of willpower but perhaps actually the seat of the will to live. DAVID GOGGINS: See, now we're talking. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And when I learned about the anterior mid-cingulate cortex, I was like almost out of my seat. And I've been in the neuroscience game since I was 20. DAVID GOGGINS: Now we're talking. ANDREW HUBERMAN: We're the same age. And I was so pumped because I've heard of the amygdala, fear, prefrontal cortex. It's planning an action. I could tell you every brain area and every-- I teach neuroanatomy to medical students. But when I started seeing the data on the anterior mid-cingulate cortex, I was like, whoa, this is interesting. And all the data point to the fact that we can build this area up. But that as quickly as we build it up, if we don't continue to invest in things that are hard for us, that we don't want to do-- that's the part that feels so Goggin-esque to me, that we don't want to do. Like if you love the ice bath-- yeah, I love the ice bath-- and you go from 1 minute to 10 minutes, guess what, your anterior mid-cingulate cortex did not grow. DAVID GOGGINS: None. ANDREW HUBERMAN: But if you hate the cold water, if you're afraid of drowning and you get into water and put your head under and survive, then the anterior mid-cingulate cortex gets bigger. But if you don't do it the next day or if you do it the next day and you enjoy it because, hey, hey, I did it yesterday, woo-hoo, happy me, Merry Christmas as you would say-- DAVID GOGGINS: Right. Merry Christmas. ANDREW HUBERMAN: --guess what, the anterior mid-cingulate cortex shrinks again. To me, this is one of the most important discoveries that neuroscience has ever made because it's that I don't want to do something but do it anyway that grows this area. And it's almost like-- I have a friend. He's been sober 30 years from alcohol. And he always says, the amazing thing about addiction is there's a cure. The problem is it only works one day at a time. And so you have to renew it every day. DAVID GOGGINS: That's right. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So the anterior mid-cingulate cortex to me-- when I learned about it, two things went off in my head. Whoa, this is super interesting. And, two, I got to tell David Goggins about this. And I waited until now-- DAVID GOGGINS: I'm glad. ANDREW HUBERMAN: --to tell you because I felt like, well, for obvious reasons I wanted to tell you and I wanted to tell you here. DAVID GOGGINS: Well, I love that because that's how I've lived my entire life. I don't know anything about that. But people go, man, you have such a strong will. It's something that you build. Like I never forget I was on a podcast one time. And this dude goes you were blessed with a strong mind. Like the hell are you talking about I was blessed with a strong mind? That's something that you have to develop. You develop that over years, decades of suffering and going back into the suffer. That's why a lot of people who graduate Navy SEAL training, they want to know-- I talk about it very openly all the time. A lot of guys don't want to go back into that water, don't want to go back into the hard stuff. And maybe not-- anything hard, anything hard in life, once you get through it, it's like you become a POW. Like how many POWs you know want to go back to POW camp? None. When something sucks so bad in life-- this is on this that we're talking about now-- very few people want to go back. They're happy they graduated. I realized I'm the same way. I don't want to go back. I have to go back. I must go back because that is exactly where all the knowledge of my life exists was back there in what you're exactly what you're talking about. Well, I didn't know anything about this. But how I grew a will was constantly doing these things to now it's just life. I wake up. While it still sucks, it's just life. You don't sit back and like, oh my god. Like I have days I don't want to do. But I know I'm going to do it. I know from years of just doing it. So that's beautiful. And this is why I came on here with you today. And I'm glad that you're talking about this because human beings need to hear this. They need to stop hearing these hacks on this and that. There's no fucking hack, bro. There's no fucking hack. Yeah, you may this and that and saunas and all this shit that they-- yeah, it's great. There is no fucking life hack. To grow that thing-- how do you grow it? Do it, and do it, and do it, and do it. That's the hack. The hack is going to fucking suck. And that's what I realized. That's what I realized. That's why I wanted to come on here today. I didn't want to come on here and talk about no fucking passion and purpose and how to get the fuck out of bed and how to hit a fucking alarm clock, all this catchphrase bullshit because that wasn't how I lived, wasn't how I lived. I lived, I woke up like every human being does and goes fuck, man. I'm a fucking piece of shit today. How the hell is this going to work out for me? And you fight that. And you fight that. You don't override it. There's no override button. It's the conversation in your head. So how do you do that? We don't have enough of these conversations about the real conversation that every human being is having. And they have no idea how to get out of it. But they do is that shit right there, man. You got to build your will. How you build your will? Exactly what you said, man. Exactly what you said. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Well, I feel like knowing the name of something, anterior mid-cingulate cortex, doesn't fundamentally change us. But one thing I like about biology is that willpower, if somebody feels they don't have it, feels like this thing that other people have. But everybody, unless they're brain-damaged, like a hole through their head, has two anterior mid-cingulate cortex, one on each side of their brain. Everyone has one. They have two. So I feel like it's just a question of opening the portal. And the portal-- again, I'm going to say 10 times, and forgive me-- is I think people go, oh, I do hard things. I do sets to failure. And then I do forced reps. I love training with weights. I love doing sets to failure. I even like forced reps. But guess what? I like forced reps. So I'll tell you, they don't build my anterior mid-cingulate cortex because I like to do it. Anything you like to do is not going to enhance this aspect of willpower. And it seems so obvious once you hear it. You kind of go, oh yeah, of course. But I think you really close that loop for people when you share what you're sharing today and what you've shared elsewhere before as well. When you're trying to explain the friction is the critical ingredient. And I think people think, oh, if it's effort, well, then I'm getting better. That's part of it, necessary, but not sufficient, as we say in science. But the suck part, the haunt, being haunted, the stick, they're really unpleasant terms. These are probably the most unpleasant terms we've ever used on this podcast. Those are the-- those are the levers. Those are the gears. And without those, this thing that you're talking about, David Goggins, as a verb-- I sometimes make the joke, but it's not a joke. Goggins is a name, and it's a verb. People go, I'm on to Goggins that. But that's, I think-- again, I'm not a psychologist. But I think that's what you're talking about, the stick, the friction, being haunted. It's the suck part that grows this anterior mid-cingulate cortex. DAVID GOGGINS: So now you know why there's so many people that fail in this world to figure out their purpose, their purpose in life. Where do I go? Because to grow that, now, you may not look like me, how my daily life looks. It don't look fun. Don't look fun. So it's a choice that people have to make in life. But what's so funny about it is even the richest of rich, who have everything, they always ask me this question. I feel like I'm missing something. I don't feel like I'm missing shit. I don't have what you all have. But you will never in my life hear me tell you I'm missing something. And everybody is. They're missing this feeling. I found it a long time ago. And I found it right there in that willpower thing. When you're nothing, nothing, and change yourself into something, like me, you call it happiness, peace, whatever the fuck you want to call it, people are missing exactly what went on with David Goggins. Why don't you smile? I do. I do. But I figured something out. That's why I am never-- you never hear me say, I'm missing something. I found it years ago. You find it in the suck. You find it in the suck. And you find it repeatedly in the suck to the point where you know exactly who you are. Most people are missing something because they don't know who they are. They never examined themselves. They've never done this experiment on themselves. The lab rat. We're all lab rats. But you're also the scientist. You create your own self. Most people are missing something because there's so much trapped in there. I don't even want to say potential. I think that's a word-- it's used out too much too. There's so much in you that God or whoever the hell you believe in or if you're an atheist in you that you have not unlocked, that you walk around with this gorgeous wife or great husband and all this money. You're like, god, I feel like I'm missing something. Yeah, because it's about 75% of you is still fucking in there, still chained up because you just didn't want to find your willpower, didn't want to find your soul, your will, your heart, your determination, your guts, your courage. And what that looks like, it looks scary, like you're little scary lab that went in. Scary to wake up every day and say, I'm stupid, but I'm going to figure out a way to be smarter versus saying, man, I just can't do that. So you limit this box. So your box becomes so small of things you can do. My box wasn't even a box. It was a fucking little pinhole. And then through examining myself, getting some willpower, some courage, it became bigger than this table. But that's what we all do. That's why I wanted to come here today and talk to you about real shit, not no fucking hacks. There's no hacks, bro. It's you against you. You against you. And if you misunderstand that, you have a real problem, real problem. I can understand you misunderstand me, running down the street, shirt off, fuck this, no. Yeah. I can get it. I get it. If you misunderstand what I'm saying right now today, the problem is you. And you don't want to fix it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Well, the children of wealthy people are a case study in how not having enough friction can destroy a life. DAVID GOGGINS: True statement. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I mean, I could list off prominent names in the press. But those are actually the least interesting. What's probably more interesting, as an example, is all the ones we don't hear about because we never hear about them. They just dwindle and wither. Or I think there's this big category of people, I'm realizing, as we have this conversation today that they're not super successful. They're not struggling. They're successful enough that they never have to-- you can get to the point where you don't have to impose friction. You even said it. Your bank account is in a place where you don't really need to do all the things you do, probably not even a small fraction of them. DAVID GOGGINS: Do nothing. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Right. But you realize the stick and being haunted is the fuel and the engine. And you'd be a-- you'd be truly crazy to give that up because you've internalized all that. But most people, they're good enough for them. And so they don't actually want to be better badly enough in order to start going rung after rung. DAVID GOGGINS: Well, think about when you build willpower. And think about how much I've built. Now that you know about this-- I didn't know about this. But think about how much I've built. Everything I've ever done in my life, I didn't want to do. Everything every day. I'm a lazy piece of shit. And I'm one of the hardest working people to ever step foot on this planet Earth. And I'm saying that very proudly because I know what I do. It's not cocky. I'll tell you I'm stupid. And I'll also tell you the exact opposite of what I've done. It's the truth. It is the truth. So imagine how much I've developed in that time frame. But this is the scary thing. Why most people don't want to do that and build that willpower is because it is scary. It unlocks a whole bunch of things about who you are and who you're not. And a lot of people don't want to go down that journey to discover who they are and who they're not because it's not a pretty journey. I mean, I've gone down it. It's not like I went down it once. I go down it all the time. And when you unlock that-- and you can't just turn it off. Like, people say, hey, how come you haven't retired yet? I built all this willpower. Do you think it's going to let me just retire because my knees hurt? It is telling me every morning-- I wake up, and I'm like, man, my knees hurt. My legs hurt. My body hurts. But you can still run. So why aren't you running? If you can still run-- there will be a time when you can't lace them up anymore. But you can still run. So I still run. When the time comes I can't run, the body will say, you just can't run. But if I can still do something, that willpower that I have created, it makes me do it every fucking day. And that's what they don't get. What builds a human being is you start with the small building blocks. And before you know it, man, you become something that it doesn't even make sense to most people because it's just who you are now. That's why I can still run at 50 with broke-- at 49 with broke down knees and broke down body because my body knows you still can. Therefore, I do. Second you stop, the willpower is gone. And that's beautiful. I'm so glad you brought that to me because I always wondered, what's this separation thing now? At 24 years old, I started building something that I didn't even know was going to be what it is now at 49. And that's all it was. It was just that. ANDREW HUBERMAN: This structure, anterior mid-cingulate cortex, has inputs and outputs from a bunch of places. But you'll probably not be surprised to learn that it's strongly activated when we move our body when we don't want to move our body. I feel like it's like the David Goggins structure. DAVID GOGGINS: It really is. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It is. And it also has strong connections to the dopamine reward pathway. And everyone goes, yay, dopamine. Everyone loves dopamine. I'm partially responsible for people knowing a bit more about dopamine. But dopamine's badly understood. Everyone thinks dopamine, dopamine hits. It's about reward. It's about motivation and drive. And there are pain inputs to the dopamine centers of the brain. No one talks about that. Everyone's like, oh, you want the chocolate, chocolate, sex, cocaine. Yeah, that's all true. It'll release dopamine. Pain releases dopamine. The anterior mid-cingulate cortex can trigger the release of dopamine in response to this thing that we're calling friction. And that's a learned thing. That's something that no animal or human being comes into the world learning. We all are averse to pain. And like pleasure, like sugar, fat. Don't like hot surfaces. But this is a structure that learns. It has neuroplasticity, the ability to change throughout the entire life span. And here's the part that I think, again, is just neuro nerd speak for what you already know and have done and exemplify, is that people say, oh, it has plasticity. You can change it. But guess what? It has plasticity in both directions. It can grow. But just as easily as it can grow, it's like Silly Putty, it can shrink. So it requires constant upkeep. And that answer isn't one that people are going to like. They're like, give me the energy drink. Give me the supplement. Give me the-- give me the sauna protocol that's going to make my anterior mid-cingulate cortex-- there's someone out there right now who's going, wait, if I took transcranial magnetic stimulation and I stimulate-- yeah, you'd probably-- actually, they've done that. They stuck a little wire during neurosurgery into this structure. This was actually discovered by a colleague of mine, Joe Parvizi. Stimulate. And the patients go, I feel like there's a storm coming. And they go, oh, is it scary? And they go, no, I want to go through it. They come off the stimulation, and people are like-- this is the seat of what we're talking about. DAVID GOGGINS: Right. Exactly. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And it learns. So the fact that you've kept this brain structure-- I'm convinced if we imaged your brain, it'd be large, and it would be larger in two years, in a year. But this is the no days off rationale because it can grow, and it can shrink. DAVID GOGGINS: I know. What you're saying right now, I didn't know any of this. And I never-- and I always talk to you. But I wish I could just put this on paper. And you're saying it in a way that people can understand. I can never put it into words on what I built and the power that is within all of us. But you put it so in a scientific way. Most people, for me, he's just crazy. That's why I don't like talking about it, man. I know I'm not crazy. I know what I had to do to get where I had to go. People look at it as crazy because there are people that just-- if you can't imagine yourself doing something, if you can't imagine yourself doing something, the person that's doing it is crazy because in your mind, the logic behind it, it doesn't compute. Therefore, you have to give somebody a title. And the title for me is usually he's crazy or he's this, he's that. No. No. For some reason, me wanting to be somebody so fucking bad in my life, I created that. And I've been trying to figure out years of my life trying to explain to people. But even though you're explaining it now, this is the easy fucking part. Them listening to this shit is the easy fucking part. The part that why they're always be the ones of ones is because putting that practice, putting that into actual work, no, man. No. No. That's where the demons come in. That's where you're like, I don't want to be better. I don't want to be better. If this is what it takes to be better, I don't want to be better. So everybody's-- that's why there's a lot of average. And it makes me so fucking mad. Every day I walk this Earth, and I see average all over the fucking place. And they want to ask me, how did you do it? I can't tell you how because you're not going to fucking-- you're not going to do it. You're not going to do it you. You're just going to-- You're going to continue being like this every day you wake up. Like you said, it's like, get the coffee. Make the pancakes. Kiss the girl. Kiss the kids. You wake up, right to work. Immediate, your mind is in action. No one wants to do that. No one. And I don't blame them. But don't be mad when you're laying there in your fucking bed, and you're in the fucking hospital, and you're 70, 80, 90 years old. And you're thinking, man, I feel like I didn't fucking do something. Because you did. You didn't do it. You didn't do shit. You may have lived a great life, man, but you're always going to feel empty inside. I don't feel empty. So call me what you want. There's not one empty bone in my fucking body because I have figured out that really-- the magic potion, at least to my life. And it's very rewarding. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I'd like to take a quick break and thank our sponsor, InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help me better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. Now, a major problem with a lot of blood tests out there, however, is that you get information back about metabolic factors, lipids, and hormones and so forth. But you don't know what to do with that information With InsideTracker, they make it very easy, because they have a personalized platform, that allows you to see the levels of all those things, metabolic factors, lipids, hormones, et cetera. But it gives you specific directives that you can follow that relate to nutrition, behavioral modification, supplements, et cetera that can help you bring those numbers into the ranges that are optimal for you. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Again, that's insidetracker.com/huberman. People like to talk about what they used to be able to do. I hear this a lot. You should have seen me in high school. I always laugh. Like, yeah, OK. Got it. And it's not just guys. You should have seen me working out in high school. I was super fit. People will look back to a time where they felt like they were capable of something. And now they're not. And you kind of want to just grab them and go, wait. That was you then. It's you now. And but people tend to think about how the conditions that were around success must have been part of it. And you can understand why. It's very rational. I was in that situation. I was successful. I'm in this situation. I'm not. That was the past. This is the present. Ergo, capable. You see how people get into these loops. And as you mentioned, you spent the first 20 years of your life in extremely challenged circumstances. And then you can see how people get to a point where everything feels hard. Like, when you're 300 pounds-- I haven't ever been 300 pounds. But I can't imagine it feels good to get up and move around. DAVID GOGGINS: It's defeating. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I got a friend. He's in excess of 300 pounds. We've been trying on him for years. But no win. And he's got crazy psoriasis on the back of his calves. And he actually smells bad sometimes because he can't wash as well as he would. He's big, big. And it pulls all my sympathy. But life is very hard for him and getting worse. He's a young guy with a lot of medical issues now, for obvious reasons. And so I think people like that think, well, it's already hard. Why would I make it harder? Your message is a little different. And you have the life experience. DAVID GOGGINS: It's a lot different. ANDREW HUBERMAN: You've been there. So for me, saying, oh yeah, lose weight-- I was a skinny guy who got to be a less skinny guy. So I don't really have a foot to stand on. What do you say to those people who are like, listen, getting up in the morning is hard. Trying to not dissolve into a puddle of my own tears and my own misery is hard. DAVID GOGGINS: You know why people connect with my books so well? For some reason, God put me in almost every fucked up situation on the planet Earth. So when I talk to people, it's not sugar-coated because I'm not saying it from I was a 175 pounds my whole life. I don't say much to those people. Maybe you're a piece of shit. Maybe you want to be nobody. Maybe you're happy exactly where you are in life because obviously, you are. Maybe you don't have the determination to be somebody better than who you are. And if you want to live with that, I'll support you in that. If you're good with being who you are, that every day you wake up, and every day, you smell like shit because you can't wash your body well, and your skin is messed up because your health's so bad, and you can't put your clothes on right, you need help with that. You need help like-- when I was 300 pounds, I needed help wiping my ass. That makes you feel good? Nothing I can say to you. If every day you wake up with this-- see, people are haunted. But they obviously like horror films because they keep watching the same fucking movie. I don't like horror films. A lot of people like horror films. So I don't say much to them. I say exactly what I said to you right there because I was once you. I didn't like horror films, so I changed it. Some people are just-- they become-- like you said, it gets real small when you're lazy and you're fat, your will. Their will is so small that they don't have any. And you can't give it to them. There has to be something-- this is what I'm talking about now because this isn't a hack. This has to be in you. Something in you has to wake up. And usually, the only person that can wake it up is you. Sometimes you can read a David Goggins book because I was all this shit and then a lot more of fucked up. But if you don't have a little flame, just barely-- you're done. I can't light it for you. And that's the harsh reality of this life that I want to get across so fucking bad. You can watch me. You can watch you. You can watch fucking Rogan and Cameron Hanes, all these motherfuckers. You can go to Tony Robbins's fucking bullshit, all this shit. You can do all this shit. You're going to keep going back and keep spending money and spending money and spending money with no results. You're going to wonder, wow. Maybe let me go try out David Goggins. He ain't going to fucking help you. You have to explore, examine the insides of yourself. And what do you really want out of life? Your friend and a lot of people out here just don't fucking want it. So guess what? Have fun with your life. Go from 300 to 350 to 400 to 450 to 500 because you don't want it. And that's the harsh reality. I can't give you shit. You can't give them shit. We can give you ideas. But end of the day, when I was losing the weight, I had to miserably wake up every morning in the cold because it was Indiana, November, when it started. I was miserable. This is your new life. Take it or leave it. There's no happiness about it. There's no peace behind it. It sucks. It just fucking sucks. And that's the one thing, if I could teach anybody anything, it just fucking sucks. And it's going to continue to suck. And then one day, you'll get to a special part in your life that it might get a little bit better. But to lose the weight you have to lose, my friend, sorry. It's going to suck every fucking day because then when you're 300 pounds, you're going to go out to lose weight, you could probably get injured. So then you got to work on the injury. And then you get even more depressed. This is what I went through. And then you're hungry because now you're depressed. It's just a vicious cycle. And if you're not strong mentally and you have no willpower, you're going to continue falling back in this hole versus the man that sits back and goes, all right, motherfucker. This is why I cuss because this is what is in me. This is what it took for me to be me. Sorry. It didn't take, hey, OK, we're going to do this today. No. This fucking really sucks. This is real, dude. This is real. And every day, I'm set back. I'm set back. I'm set back. I'm set back. So this is what I would tell your boy. This is exactly what I'd tell him. Every day you wake up, you're going to probably be set back for the first four weeks before you lose significant weight because the mind is going to be fucking with you the whole time. There's no dopamine. There's no dopamine in there at 300 pounds. You got nothing. Your hormones are shot. You have to envision something that is more powerful than you. Something has to get you out of bed. And you have to create it. It has to be false because you're not it. You're a fat piece of shit. And that's the reality of it. So you have to create a false reality, to live in that just to get to work on yourself. That's the reality. ANDREW HUBERMAN: He'll see this, and he'll appreciate that message. We'll see what he does. DAVID GOGGINS: We'll see. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So far, last 13 years, it's been no movement. But I have had other friends who were drug and alcohol addicts who quit after one conversation. Never went back. DAVID GOGGINS: That's awesome. That means they want it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah, just one guy, I won't out him, but walked up to me at a party in 2019, July 4th party, and said, I'm a pile. And I go, what? And he goes, I'm a pile. Look at me. I'm 60 pounds overweight. And I go, do you drink? He goes, every day. I go, how much? He goes, a case. He goes, I smoke a lot of weed. But he's successful in other areas of his life. And so I said, well, here's what I know. Quit alcohol and weed for you. I'm not telling people what to do. Don't eat until 2:00 PM. Get on an exercise bike, and pedal in the morning like someone's chasing you with a poison dart until you want to puke. And I was kind of half-joking. And then two months later, he was, like, I haven't had a drink. I lost 30 pounds. He lost those 60 pounds. He never went back. Now, he's super fit. It's amazing. So some people flip the switch. He is very self-critical by nature. DAVID GOGGINS: That's what flips-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: He's super self-critical. DAVID GOGGINS: Yep. That's what flips the switch. Think about it, man. We know what to do. We don't need Andrew Huberman to tell us what to do. We know what to do, every one of us. That's why he flipped it so fast because he knew what to do. He didn't go by your exact protocol. He didn't go by the exact-- no. He knew exactly what to do. And you just saying some shit to him, it woke something up. He knew what to do. And that's the thing that people need to get that. You know what to do. Why aren't you doing it? ANDREW HUBERMAN: And I'm talking about myself now. Those modes of just kind of passive consumption, they're so easy to wash over us. I used to have this thing, and I'm fighting this now because I knew we were going to have this conversation today, where I like to start things on the hour or the half hour. Worst practice in the world for me because if I miss that half hour, I'm like, oh, it's 12:33. I'll start at 12:45. Ah, it's 12:45. I'll start at 1:00. I just lost time. And so this is so stupid. And the other day, I was like, man, I got to tell David about this because my new thing is I start no matter what time it is. If I wake up in the middle of the night-- I got a friend. He paints in the middle of the night. I'm like, you're an insomniac? He's like, I don't know. I just do it. Then sometimes he goes back to sleep. Sometimes he doesn't. Everyone's got their thing. But I thought about this. I'm like, no more am I going to say I'm starting at 1:00 because I know me. If I miss the 1:00 ding and then my pen's not hitting the paper or I'm not typing on the keyboard, I'm not going to do it. But That's a self-admitted weakness. DAVID GOGGINS: I love it, man. I had that for a lot of years. I know I'm going to do it. That's the haunting part is that it's going to happen. It has to happen. And that's a fact. Like, there's no get out of jail free card, bro. None. Like, that is a life that I don't know. I don't have that ability. Or I have the ability. I don't have the-- I'm not good enough, smart enough. I'm not talented enough to do that. Some people are. Some people can start at 1:00. Some people don't have to start at all. If you lack talent, you can't sit back and say, I'll start in half an hour. I can't do that. I got to start now. And after I get back from starting, I got to start again. And then when I get done with that run or that study session, if it wasn't good enough, I got to go back again because repetition is what taught me everything. So you can honestly outwork anything. But it's that you, obviously, are a very talented man. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Well, I have worked hard at certain things and built up some things that I've been good at most of my life. DAVID GOGGINS: You're amazing. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Gathering, organizing, and disseminating information's something I've been doing since I was a little kid. I used to give lectures at school on Monday about stuff I learned over the weekend. DAVID GOGGINS: See, check that out. ANDREW HUBERMAN: But they took me to a psychiatrist. We're the same age. Back then, if you got sent to a psychiatrist, people thought you were crazy. DAVID GOGGINS: I was one. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah, exactly. DAVID GOGGINS: I was one. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Exactly. So I remember feeling like a freak. Also, I didn't have a stutter, but I had a grunting tic. It comes back when I'm tired. And the only thing that helped that was hitting my head on something, shaking my head, which is why skateboarding was good because I'd slam, and I'd feel like, oh. I feel good. But that's not healthy. That's not good. Or just work. Work is what gets it out. It's like an-- it's like an RPM or high. [REVVING SOUND] Anyway, that's me. But yeah, I think certain things over time, I feel like talent or gifts or whatever you want to call them, but there are many things that are exceedingly difficult for me. And I have learned from your example. I know that you are very both humble and very clear that you don't have-- you say, you're not going to get it by examining you. But I think the way you're sharing today and the way you've shared it on other podcasts before, there are pieces that really help people feel into the process of what you're talking about today. We're elaborating on it, I think, a lot, this notion of being haunted and the stick. I mean, of course, of course, now it makes so much sense why you don't want to talk about sleep or rest or recovery because that's-- sure, that's important. I've heard you say, yes, you sleep. Yes, you eat. Yes, you hydrate. Yes, you will stretch your psoas or whatever. But it's funny how that becomes the viral message. DAVID GOGGINS: That's why I said fuck that today. ANDREW HUBERMAN: But that's not the unique-- that's not the unique message that you carry. Like, anyone can talk about that. So do I have that right? That you're acknowledging sleep is important. Recovery is important. DAVID GOGGINS: Yes. ANDREW HUBERMAN: But that's not what you're about. DAVID GOGGINS: You have to forego something. Yes. Ice baths. Saunas. Sleep. Nutrition. All this shit's so fucking important, dude. I don't have time for some of it. To extract what I had to extract, something had to give. Like, you talk about you when you were younger. You would give these speeches and stuff. The same age you were giving speeches, I was trying to figure out how to say the without stuttering. And I realized, as I got older, that all these things are important. But for me to stop stuttering, I got to build fucking confidence. And speech therapy didn't help that. Nothing helped that. I have to forgo a lot of shit to be as fucked up as I am to build confidence, for me to stand in a fucking room of 10,000-- of one person, and not [STUTTERING SOUNDS] and be like, oh, and put my head down. Let me look around. Let me read these paragraphs first. And then before I read the paragraphs, because they're calling me next, let me just leave the room because I'm going to stutter. That's a miserable life. And that's one of many things I did besides lying, besides being insecure, besides being immature, besides being fat, besides being one of the only Black kids in my school. There's a lot of things I had to overcome to gain confidence. And in doing so, a lot of that had to go. A lot of it. So I became the guy that became, once again, misunderstood. You only sleep four hours a day, two hours a day? Sometimes you don't sleep at all? Like, what's this, and what's this, and what's this? I know it's all important. I can't. Something's got to go. For me to get confidence, because confidence is the building block of where I'm trying to go, for me to gain confidence in myself, this fucked up kid has got to do a lot of fucked up shit to gain confidence. And along the way, the stutter went away. And I gained confidence. And now, my life is a little bit more-- there is no balance. There is no balance. It's a little bit more what it should be for a lot of people. But there'll never be balance because confidence is something that you're constantly-- confidence and belief you're building every day. And so something's got to give. And I'm willing to forego a lot of things to have that because I know if you want to give somebody kryptonite, take that shit away from them. So yeah, I don't sleep sometimes. And sometimes I don't eat the right way. And sometimes I don't do this and do that and whatever, man. But you put me in a room of 10,000 people any time of the day, and I'll walk in there thinking I'm the baddest motherfucker in here because I know what it took to be on this stage. And a lot of people would not do that. So that's what it takes. ANDREW HUBERMAN: There's a question I've been wanting to ask you since we started. And I thought about coming in here. And I've been thinking about in the weeks ahead of this. And I'm going to just come clean and say I don't exactly know how to ask the question. DAVID GOGGINS: Just ask it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It's about relationships. DAVID GOGGINS: Oh, do it, man. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So I know in myself that my discipline is much higher when it's just me. But that's because I had certain things early on. But then I was a terrible student. Barely finished high school. But then when I got serious, I got serious. But I did that by staying away from everybody. And anyone's who's ever had a relationship of any kind, but in particular, romantic relationships, knows that, yes, you can derive tremendous support from those. Like, you got this, baby. You can go. And you're like, yeah. I got this. She said I got this. Feels great to finish something and share with someone, share a meal, get the hug. But there's another side to all of that that I'd like to learn more about from you, which is there's a warm body next to you in bed in the morning. You don't want to get up. They also have needs. You've got your mission that people sometimes need things from us. But also, oftentimes, the people that love us most, that truly love us and that want to support us, don't understand this thing. And they're the first people to tell us, like, listen. Take a day off. And then this whole cycle, at least in my head, goes off, like, you just want a vacation. And then it's almost like a paranoia. I'm not saying anything nice about myself right now. DAVID GOGGINS: All good, man. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Former girlfriends are going to be like, yeah. Like, they remember that. And so support of people close to you is critical. This could be friends. Could be romantic partners. Whatever. But they're also-- the knife cuts both ways. It can be the thing that can really undermine this thing that you're talking about because people that care about us also want to see us comfortable. They want to see us happy. They want to see us peaceful. They want to see us wake up from a great night's sleep. And they want things too. So how do you untangle that whole bit? DAVID GOGGINS: Well, it's funny, man. I'm unbalanced, but I'm mostly unbalanced towards the family side, which people don't get about me. I'll start being unbalanced. I get all my stuff in. But what I do is I make sure that my family has everything they need, everything they need, those who want to be part of my family. Some don't. Some family members don't want to be part of David Goggins. I get it. I got it. That's life. Those who are part of my family, I give them everything they need so they can leave me the fuck alone. I make sure you're happy as fuck because I got to go to work. And I don't mean smokejumping. I don't mean running. I mean all of it. It takes every-- I can't have you in my fucking shit. I can't. So I know for me to have a family, I gotta make sure that you realize I'm going to give you everything you need. So when you start bitching at me, I'm going to say, look, hang on. I dedicated my life to give you everything you need. I need this time right here for me to be the best I can be because this journey started without anybody. And I make sure everybody knows that who comes in my life. I've been left-- think about it. I was left alone at a young age to figure this shit out. I figured it out for myself and have been very successful for myself. No one's going to come in here and fuck with my shit. That's why I make sure I will take care of whatever you need. Whatever you need from me, you got it. Money, house, my love, my support, I'm going to give you everything you need. That said, I do it the highest level possible. And I'm saying that with Jennifer in the next room. So please come here and say something if it's wrong, Jennifer. I don't give a fuck. Say what you got to say. So then when it's time for me to go to work, I expect you to do the same for me because it takes every bit of me to do what I have to do. So I make sure that I'm very unbalanced from my family so I can be exactly that unbalanced for myself. And that's how I do it. I let people know right up front, I'm not what you want in a man. I guarantee that. There's going to be a lot of late nights, a lot of early mornings, a lot of times where I got to be by myself thinking about the process that is next in my mind. I can't have aggravation. I can't have this. Can't have that. There's a lot of things. But I let them know up front. I'm very vocal about that. Sometimes relationships work for me. Sometimes they didn't. But that's who I am. One thing I did wrong in my life was I tried for so many years to please people. And I did it at the expense of myself. I was leaving a lot in the tank. And when you do that, you stop living. But the person in your life is happy as fuck because you're giving them everything they want. They have their-- their life is full. But you feel empty. And that's not a relationship to me. So for me, it's important that you know exactly who I am because this is what life made. And I'm not trying to change it because I just figured it out. So I'm not trying to compromise David Goggins. I would never, ever compromise David Goggins. That doesn't mean I won't give you what you need and what you want and what you desire. But I don't need money. I don't need fame. I don't need shit. So I give it all away. What I do need is to make sure that that willpower is worked on every fucking day and every night for the rest of my life because that's the one thing that's going to keep me feeding you, keeping you where you need to be, because once that willpower is gone, 300-pound David Goggins, he may not look like it, but I will walk around with it. So the things that are important to you in life, you must do always. Or you're nobody. And that's how I handle relationships. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Amen to that. Something I could personally work on is that upfront, clear communication because it resonates that feeling of there's something inside that's not getting worked out that, when I'm on my own, it's a lot easier. But then, of course, wanting relationships and family, I think that's a healthy part of being human too. And obviously, you've worked it out. So I appreciate you sharing that. I don't think I've ever heard you talk about it that way before. DAVID GOGGINS: People are scared of that conversation with their wife, husband, girlfriend, boyfriend. But why are you scared of it? Why are you scared to tell a motherfucker, your wife, your husband, who you are, who you are, exactly who you are? And that was the problem I had-- that's a problem that a lot of us have in life. No one knows who you really are. No one knew who I really was. I went to a school where there were a lot of Black kids. A lot of Black kids didn't want to be in special ops. I never talked about special ops to Black kids. Why? I was wondering what-- I'm not going to fit in. That's not what they do. A lot of Black kids don't do that kind of shit. So whatever I wanted to do, no one really knew the real me growing up because I never wanted anybody to know the real me. I was always afraid of what you might say or how you're going to feel or whatever. You got feelings. You have a life that you have to live. So it's important that whatever's on your mind, you let that person know. Therefore, you're giving them the option to be with you or not. This is who I am. If you don't like it, that's good, man. I got it. But this is David Goggins. So that honest conversation is very important, man, so everybody knows where they stand. That person may not be for you. And that's all good. ANDREW HUBERMAN: This world could use a lot more of that upfront, completely honest conversation. I feel like so much of the world's problems are because everyone's dancing around these issues. DAVID GOGGINS: It takes a lot. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Recently in the news, seeing people losing their job because they won't say something publicly. You can tell they kind of what it. It's like, people just, I think, deep down really crave the direct message. Like, what are you about? What are you not about? But I think now, everyone's afraid of getting canceled. It's a big deal, getting canceled, that people think, oh, I can't work if I am who I am. Or if I'm not pretending to be somebody else, then silence is considered agreement. There's all sorts of complicated stuff. And I do feel for the generation coming up because we didn't have social media and all of that. Again, just walled off from that. There's a real benefit from just not paying attention. DAVID GOGGINS: People love to lie. People love to lie. You know, I thought I was only a person-- when I was growing up, I thought I was the only person that lied because I lived in a bubble. And people love to lie about who they're not. They love to lie about who they're not, dude. And that's, for me, the reason why I'm so vulnerable, and I'm so real and honest. Find somebody to come out and tell me I'm lying about my fucking life. And for me to come where I came from and have the resume I have now, you know the confidence you get? How I don't care who-- you're going to-- you're going to judge me? You're going to judge me? What have you done in your life? So me, being so honest and so upfront and so truthful, that came with me finally figuring out who I was, but also conquering David Goggins, the demons of David Goggins. Therefore, now, you're just an open book. You look at somebody, look them right in the eye. Tell me exactly who the fuck you are. You walk away. I'm good, bro, because I know exactly what this journey took to get here. And that gives you a fire and a passion that people can call you nigger, they can call you-- if you're a lesbian or gay or bise-- call me whatever the fuck you want. If you put yourself in the fire and you come out every fucking day like this, brush it off, not scared to go back in there again, come on, man. Your truth is real. You come out every day, man, with a way of talking to people that people don't have because there's no truth behind them. And the truth is the starting line. When you sit down the ugly mirror and say, I'm this, I'm this, I'm this and this, you finally started your life. Maybe 40 years old. Maybe 40 years old, five, six kids, wife. But the second you look in that mirror and you say, I'm this, I'm this, I'm this, I'm this, I'm this, well, basically, I'm not this, I'm not this, I'm not this, I can't do this, I can't do this, I'm all these insecurities, your life finally started. And once you start that life, man, the truth comes out big time because you no longer care. So that's the problem. Most people just don't want to have that conversation to the point where they can go on stage and a million people and say, I'm all of this. And have a good day. See you. It's empowering. It's very empowering. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I feel like the way we're educated in school, but also outside of school, is we're trained, as human being, as these young brains, to try and figure out how to get positive feedback from other people. It's like we're little dogs. You have a bulldog. DAVID GOGGINS: That's right. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I had a bulldog. Saw the picture of your bulldog. She's great. DAVID GOGGINS: Charlie dog. ANDREW HUBERMAN: They're an amazing species. DAVID GOGGINS: They are. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I think of them economy of effort or amazing breed, excuse me. They're an amazing breed. Economy of effort. They don't do anything unless it's necessary. It's the exact opposite of everything we're talking about. It's kind of interesting. And they're kind of hedonists. Now, it is true that they'll die to protect you. DAVID GOGGINS: Oh, yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And it's an instinct. I saw that with Costello. I'm sure that-- DAVID GOGGINS: I saw it with Charlie. Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It's an instinct. But if they're not in that position, if there's no need to exert effort-- DAVID GOGGINS: They're resting. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah. So your bulldog's resting for you. DAVID GOGGINS: Yes. Got it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Exactly. So you don't need to rest because-- DAVID GOGGINS: Active recovery Charlie. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Perfect. DAVID GOGGINS: That's it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Perfect. That's going to be your answer from now on. People go, does he sleep? Does he rest? Go, no. He somehow worked it out so his bulldog does it for him. DAVID GOGGINS: Right. ANDREW HUBERMAN: But we're sort of indoctrinated into this way of being from a time that we're young, where, of course, praise feels good. Someone tells you, hey, I like that shirt, or good job today, or nicely done. Or for me, because growing up in a big pack of friends growing up, and I was never the greatest athlete, wasn't terrible, wasn't great, et cetera, like, a fist bump, or, like, feeling crewed up. And you're just like, yeah. But you've talked about this before in reference to the SEAL Teams. We both know a lot of people in that community. And the Teams component is a big part of it for a lot of people. And it's a wonderful thing. But there's a danger to that dopamine hit, for lack of a better way to put it, from we can only derive when it's coming from the outside. You're talking about being able to either say, good job, but also, just look to one's own personal history and say, I've done hard things. And I can do it again and again because I do it again and again and again. You're talking about parenting yourself, inspiring yourself, scaring yourself, all of that from the inside. So very different than the way we're raised, which is to figure out how to get the biscuit. DAVID GOGGINS: It's funny, man. People want to know how I'm always motivated. It's the unseen work, which you just said is a true statement. Those are false dopamine hits that people are giving you, man. There's no belief in that. These are teamwork dopamine-- like, I'm out running at 2 o'clock in the morning, 1 o'clock in the morning in the gym, long sessions by myself. That's real. I'm able to extract dopamine, the good dopamine whenever I want. Man, I've trained 99% of my life alone. No one patted me on the back. I did all of the work alone. And while I'm still hard on myself, I know what I did. So whenever times get bad for me, people are all this, who's going to carry the boats and lo-- that's real. I hate that people know me for that guy because that guy is not every fucking day. When they see me, they want that energy. That's not me every day. I can extract it immediately when I need to because when you train alone-- and I lived alone for so many years in this misery. And you're able to get out by yourself. I can take myself to such a level of real passion and purpose. And the feeling I get is something I can't even explain by mys-- I don't need anyone. That's why people come to me to motivate them. No one can motivate me. I have a resume full of fucking motivation that whenever I'm down, I'm like, oh hang on, motherfucker. Oh, you know the truth. You know the truth. You know the darkness of the fucking dungeons and the fucking demons that fly. And then from there, it's like, OK. You were there. You know this. There was no one there to pick up the rucksack, to pick up the boat, to pick up the log, to go in there. It was you. It was you. There was no pat on the fucking back at 300, at 275, at 250, at 220. No. That was you. So those things that come out of me, that extract from me in the darkness, people are looking for that pat on the back. Where is it? Oh, I don't need it because what I've done is in the fucking unseen work. I built Frankenstein. So whenever shit gets nasty, David Goggins goes, you had nobody anyway, motherfucker. So see how I'm talking to myself right now? That's me. That's shit fires me the fuck up. That shit makes me fucking nuts. You had nobody anyway, motherfucker. Look around you. There was no fucking team. It was you. There was no weight loss program or mom and dad waking you up, saying you can do it, you can be better, trying to build belief. You built belief when you had nothing. Rock bottom. You did that. So as times get hard for me, the truth comes out. And my truth is powerful as fuck. It's real. It's tangible. I feel it. It comes out of my brain as I speak about it. I'm reliving every single dark moment of my life to be here. So that is what people don't get. That is what motivates David Goggins is the unseen work. But everybody needs that pat on the back. They need that training partner. They need that accountability coach. I don't need that shit. And neither do they. But it's what we've trained ourselves to believe that we need. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It's almost like there's this pill on the shelf. I'm speaking in analogy. And we take it, and we get jazzed up. And we're like, yeah. But there's this other medicine cabinet behind there. And it's in us. You're saying the real medicine cabinet is inside. DAVID GOGGINS: Oh, yes. When you continue to overcome-- and I had so many obstacles to overcome. So it's actually a benefit to me. But the benefit, it's not like a benefit like that. You have to have the courage and the patience to overcome and overcome. Before you know it, man, you have a whole medicine cabinet. But there's no medicine in the motherfucker. There's no pre-workout. I don't take none of that shit. All I got to do is flip my brain. Put my finger in there and say, OK, that's a good one. It's all I got to do, man. I got the Rolodex. I'm just like, go fuck yourself, Goggins. And oh, but you won. Let's do that one today. There's nothing I need. And this is the thing that people don't get about David Goggins. I can't teach it in a 1-minute video. We all have this ability to have our own medicine cabinet. But unless you go in there and put the medicine in there, it's always going to be fucking empty, man. You're always going to need the pre-workout. You're always going to need the-- I don't drink coffee. I don't do ca-- I don't do none of that. I don't need it. I can run for 70 hours, and I have before, no caffeine. I got all this wonderful shit that I overcame on my own, by myself, in the darkness, that, man, when it's cold, I'm hot. When it's hot-- I can feed myself all the time. That's why when people say, man, why aren't you missing anything, I can't explain it to you, man. Can't explain it to you. You'll never understand. That's why I don't do all these podcasts, dude. I love you, man. That's why you-- my first book, you did a blurb for me. That's why I'm here. I love what you're doing for people, man. But I can't explain this. I can't. I can't explain this because people don't want to do this. They don't want to do this, man. But I don't know, man. I get jazzed up even talking about it, man, because so many people think my life is just so, oh god, his life is horrible. Don't follow him. He's crazy. Really? ANDREW HUBERMAN: But there are a good number of people, I would say, and that's an under-- that actually do. I think what I'm hearing today, and it's really sinking in, is that a great many people either partially or completely misunderstand you. DAVID GOGGINS: Yes. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I'll put myself in the partially category. DAVID GOGGINS: Big time. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Because I thought it was about just forward center of mass, carrot, carrot, carrot, carrot. But it's the stick. DAVID GOGGINS: It's the stick. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And it's being haunted. And you know, I do have examples from my own life, which is not what today is about, about being really afraid and then turning things around. My biggest fear is getting comfortable. I do not have as much of a stick-oriented approach. But today's conversation's changing the way I think. I'm not going to step away from this and think, OK, there are 25 neural circuits that can explain 10 of the things that David's talking about. And what I'm thinking about is the fact that everybody has a brain. They have a mind. Forget the brain. The brain's just the physical structure. But what that manifests, what that creates is the mind. And everybody has that. So I do believe that everyone has the capacity to do what you're talking about at some level. I also will be the first to confess that I think you are highly unusual. Let's just say maybe even n of 1, as we say in science. Sample size of one. Somebody who has created this process for themselves and keeps them in this-- themselves in this forward center of mass with the stick battering the back of their head all the time. Highly unusual. But this internal medicine cabinet that you're talking about building up, true confidence, not needing anything from the outside, I like to think that people want that. They want to be known. They're afraid. But that they want to be known for who they really are and that you're describing the path to do this. And I will say I'm immensely grateful that you're talking to us this way today about things that you've talked about before. But we're hitting it a little differently, I like to think. DAVID GOGGINS: Very differently. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Because what you're talking about is a process. It's verbs. It's all verbs. DAVID GOGGINS: All action. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And it's not about success. It's more, actually, about keeping that friction dialed to 10. And no energy drink, no supplement. People often misunderstand me. They think-- like, I'm big on people getting sunlight in the morning so they set their circadian rhythm and get better sleep and so they can-- et cetera. But then people always think-- they go straight to the supplements. What should I take? And then, of course, people think I'm all about supplements. And supplements are one piece for me. But it's like tiny fraction compared to the doing, the do's and don'ts. DAVID GOGGINS: That's why I didn't want to talk about that today. That's why I'm glad we're talking about this. This is it. This is it. Like, the brain is the most powerful weapon in the world. And it's crazy how a kid that wasn't real smart, I was forced to go only internal. External had to go away. The external world had to go away. In living so deep inside myself, it was me in this brain and figuring out how this thing works. And so many people are doing exactly that, the supplements, the this, the that. And I agree, it helps. But once you figure out your brain, you become unstoppable to almost anything. Yeah, you can't beat death. You can't whatever, whatever. Your brain is amazing. Once you feed it the right conversation, the right mental nutrients, the right mental supplements, the right internal dialogue at the right time with the right hit, with the right proof of what you've done in the past, and you send that right to the right circuit, dude, you're a fucking beast. A beast. But once again, you just can't read about it. You can't sit back and be a theorist. You have to be a fucking practitioner. And in that practice is where that becomes proof-positive of what I'm saying. It's like, god, David Goggins is blowing my mind. What is this? He's not crazy. And so many people, a lot of people, have listened to me the right way. And they come back, and they're like, I'm totally on board. It happened. It happened. I'm like, it'll keep going, man, if you keep doing it. But that is it, man. There's no sun. There's no glory. There's no carrot. There's no victory. But there is all of it in one. I just can't explain it real well to people, man. But what you get the other end is something that you're always found. You're never lost anymore. Doesn't mean the journey is easy. Doesn't get any easier. But you're always found. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I love that. I just want to hover on that for a sec the same way we hovered on haunted and the stick. I think people feel lost. I've certainly felt lost at times in my life, many times. And yeah, there's that thing. I don't think there's a neuroscience or a psychology term for it. Someone will put it in the comments and say, oh yeah, that's what so-and-so said. But like you said, we're not trying to be theoretical here. We're trying to be practical. The business of finding yourself and knowing, oh. But it's sort of like I'm safe because I'm in danger, and I've been in danger before, and I got myself out. It always seems to come back to verbs. Again, I don't have a language for this. For once, I'm lost for words. There's like-- it's about a process, the algorithm. And the reason-- here, I'm just kind of trying to make sure I'm understanding things correctly. One of the reasons why it must be uncomfortable for you to be who you are publicly is because people want to focus on the running or the swearing. And by the way, the swearing is welcome. I'll tell you, I came up through laboratories where all three people I worked for swore a lot. But there was one rule. I couldn't swear at people. So my graduate advisor, brilliant woman, unfortunately, she died early, they all died early-- I'm the common denominator. I had that internalized for a long time. Anyway, she said, but if you swear at people, you're out. But you can swear as much as you want. So that's the rule I have. It's like, you can swear as much as you want. Just don't swear at people. And if you swear at people, better be ready to fight. Definitely not going to fight you. So you can swear at me, get away with it. But the fact of the matter is that it must be frustrating that people-- because I know people go, oh, it's all about supplements and ice baths. Listen, I like supplements. I love supplements and ice baths. But that's not the full picture. It's just a gravitational pull. It's the swearing. It's the running. It's his feet that are all messed up. It's the fact that he got a Triton. He's a SEAL guy. Talk about that too. And there's a gravitational pull for people. And they're missing-- that's the tip of the iceberg, is what I'm realizing. I'm realizing that today thanks to the way you're phrasing things because the bigger vessel is all in here. And as you said, how do you put that in a book? DAVID GOGGINS: It's impossible. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Because it's highly individual. You do it your way. And you're saying, everyone needs to go figure out how to do it their way for them. DAVID GOGGINS: Yes. And the thing about being misunderstood, it's very frustrating, more than I can even imagine. I can't even express how frustrating it is when the cussing and everything comes from a place of real. I can't explain what I do without it. The passion comes out of me. It's almost like speaking in tongues because when you put that much work-- and people go, oh yeah, there's been this basketball player, this football player, this-- dude. No. No. Everything, everything is work. Everything. And people don't believe it. So when I speak, the motherfucker and the fuck and the shit, that is what it took for me, what it takes for me, the anger, the passion, the jaw-dropping-- just it takes that because I'm not that. This is how I look at it, man. What built this guy? Let's imagine being in the coldest water you can possibly take. I always go back to Hell Week with this. I hated that water. Hated it. You're sitting there locked arms, and you're in the water all the time. And they're bringing you in and out of the water, in and out of the water. When you have this dialogue in your head, and these people are judging me off a freaking 1-minute video, and you're constantly your whole life, when you figured it out at 24, that I got to-- I just got to, just fucking got to, and this is just going to suck. Every day it's going to suck. And live like that to be better. And I put it this way. I'm in the water. The water is going over my head, the Pacific Ocean. It's freezing. February. Cold as shit. Been through three Hell Weeks. For you to constantly win, win, win, when this voice over here, the real you, is saying get the fuck out of here, go, you're nobody. You've always been nobody. And it's true. People don't hear that. That's a true voice. That's a real reality of David Goggins at 24 years old. It's not a false reality. And then you had to create another voice over here that is saying, you're better than that other voice. And you're in the freezing cold water that both voices don't want to fucking be in. But you win. Then goes from the water to the studying to the running to the losing weight to how you eat to how you function as a man. Every day of your life, you're winning these battles. And then I have normal people who only have one voice. Never created the second voice. The winning voice is the second voice. They have one voice. And that's just, I'm a piece of shit. And that's all they hear. And then they judge people like me who are out here trying to be better. It's something that I can never really-- it's a frustrating thing for me because I know the majority of people. I know what goes on in the brain because I studied the mind more than almost-- more than you because I'm a practitioner. So for you to be a piece of shit and come out of that, you don't just come out of it. You spend decades studying your mind and the human mind on how it functions in good environments, bad environments, stressful environments, patient environments. You study it all because you had to put all this together to create the mind to become successful. So I had to-- it wasn't like God blessed me with this brain. I had to create a mind. And so in doing so, I figured out every piece of shit human being in the world because that's what I was going off of for myself. So I know why you go on Instagram. I know why you-- because you just have the time. You have the time because you don't want to put that time into bettering oneself. So I know why I'm misunderstood. I'm misunderstood by people who have plenty of time on their hands to misunderstand me because they are exactly where I once was, which is a low-life, lazy piece of shit. And it's the harsh reality of people who troll you, who go after you. They have nothing better to do with their lives. It's not some after school special. It's the truth. But I once was that way. I know where it all comes from. That's why it's frustrating to me now because I'm not so frustrated at the fact that I'm being trolled. I'm frustrated by the fact that you don't have the courage, the courage to try to be somebody better than what you're not. And that's the frustrating part. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It's interesting because earlier, we were talking about relationships. And you said, in a very candid way, and I really appreciate you sharing that, that you make sure that the people close to you, your family, has everything they need and that they also understand that you're going to take what you need to continue to build you period. DAVID GOGGINS: Period. ANDREW HUBERMAN: In some ways, it seems you've also included the general public in that family. You're saying, listen, I'm going to give you what you need. I'm going to give you as much of myself as I can, except I'm going to stop right at the line that if I were to cross it is going to prevent me from continuing to build myself. And by the way, this relationship only exists because I don't cross that line. And I think as much as there are detractors out there or people that try-- I mean, whatever they're doing is pretty feeble, in my mind. I mean, it's like cap gun fire, it that. DAVID GOGGINS: Very feeble. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So many of us, men and women, old and young, hear something and feel something in your message. Like, yeah, it seems kind of crazy. Gosh. Doesn't he ever just relax? What about his sleep? Look at his feet. He's going to-- he's going to injure himself. Listen, I'll be very direct. I got friends who were in the Teams who just go, what's he going to do when he can't run? And I know the answer is keep running. DAVID GOGGINS: That's right. ANDREW HUBERMAN: But it's more comfortable for people, even high achievers-- DAVID GOGGINS: Especially high achievers. ANDREW HUBERMAN: --to believe that if you took one thing away, that it would all go away. It's absolutely clear that's not the case with you. I'm 100% convinced. I just know that because we're talking about this. DAVID GOGGINS: Do you know how many times I haven't been able to run? Two heart surgeries. Multiple knee surgeries. And after every knee surgery, they said, you're not going to run again. And I'm fine with that. There's no running up here, bro. None. This was what it was all about. That's what they lost. What if you can't run? Give a fuck. It was never about running. Why do you think I run? It's the worst thing. I hate doing it more than anything. Hence the willpower. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Right. Your anterior mid-cingulate cortex DAVID GOGGINS: Hence the willpower. ANDREW HUBERMAN: --would start to regress if you loved running. DAVID GOGGINS: Think about it. Every day, I wake up. I don't just run a mile, two miles. It's the one thing I hate the most to do. And I do it like I love it. 250, 260, 300-mile runs at one time. No sleep. And every step, when I get to the-- think about this. I get to the fucking start line cussing at Jennifer. Why the fuck am I here? I hate this shit. After 70-some hours of running, every fucking question I ever had is answered. Every question I had is answered. I capped success. People go, what do you mean, you capped success? For me to be who I am-- so when I go smokejump, I smoke jump three to four months out of the year, sometimes five. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Could you, just for those that aren't educated about-- just give us a brief description of what smokejumping entails. DAVID GOGGINS: So basically, you jump into fires. Not into them, but you jump by fires that people can't get to. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So out of planes and helicopters. DAVID GOGGINS: Right, out of planes. I parachute. It's all parachuting. So you parachute out of airplanes. And then you fight the fire, you and sometimes four other guys or maybe eight other guys, guys and gals. And you're putting this fire out. So I lose millions of dollars every summer to do this. It blows people's minds. Why the hell are you doing this? ANDREW HUBERMAN: And you're breathing soot. DAVID GOGGINS: I'm breathing soot. Knees are jacked up. Hitting the ground. Hurting. Whatever. Talking to normal people, they'll never get it, so I don't even explain it to them. But this is why-- this is why I call it capped success. I'm talking financial success. For me to continue having that willpower, the second I just become a speaking monkey and travel around and speaking gigs 12 months out of the year, put camps on, do this, put on lectures, get supplement lines and do this and write more books and shit, I've ruined the exact thing I worked on my entire life. And while I didn't know it until the day, but something always told me, this is a very, very, very perishable skill, this willpower that you have, because I do have a willpower that I have never seen in anybody in my life. It is a haunting force that just keeps me going. And I know that that is my strength. If you have that-- so that's worth every dime I've ever made in my life is the fact I can look a man in the eye finally and have a real conversation without going like this because I'm lying, or I'm a piece of shit. Or I know-- you know how a person-- and so many people do this shit. They're talking to you on who they want to be. They're lying to you. And they walk away-- I've done it so many times. You walk away like, god, man. If I could just tell them the truth. Why the hell can't I just tell him the truth? Know how good it feels for me now to look at you in your eye and every man I see because women won't get this. Women will not get this. Man to man, that man shit, when you look another man in the eye, and you know that everything you're fucking saying is real, and it comes from a real working place, something that you earned, it's the best feeling in the world. ANDREW HUBERMAN: You can say that actually happened. Like, I know with certainty what I'm saying actually happened. DAVID GOGGINS: Actually happened. Who I am and who I say I am, I am. No more lies. No more skirting the truth. No more bullshit. And that is worth every dime I've ever made in my life. And I swear to God on that. Every dime I've ever made in my life, building who I built, so I capped success because I know that if I ever go 12 months out of the year and don't put several-- every day, I'm going at it. But several months out of the year, I go right back to ground zero, which means I'm just fucking David Goggins. No Goggins. No carry boats, fucking logs bullshit. It's just pick up that fucking Pulaski and dig. Hey, get that fucking pump. Walk down a mile. Put it in the fucking water. Mosquitoes beating-- you're just David Goggins. You're nobody because that's where my growth is. That's where my willpower comes from. And that's where it stays. That's why when I talk to you now-- and can't nobody talk like this, dude. People don't talk with this kind of passion because it ain't there. It ain't there. They're regurgitating some shit from 30 fucking years ago. I'm regurgitating shit from an hour ago. Hour ago. Come on, man. It's just be real. And I can't be on these podcasts. I can't talk to anybody without being real. I'll go away. I'll just go away because I can't give you what I want to give you. ANDREW HUBERMAN: You said perishable skill. I think that's another set of words I want to highlight because skill implies behavior. And when we were just talking a second ago about the deep, true bedrock sense of confidence that comes from looking someone in the eye and telling somebody something that you absolutely know it's true because it happened, you're talking about actions. Not talking about perceptions. You're not talking about what you believe happened. You know it happened. And there's something really concrete about actions. I mean, that's what's so interesting is we're talking about the mind. But actions are the manifestation of the mind. And the stuff that just stays in here, people die with that. It doesn't go anywhere. Long ago, somebody said-- I forget what the context was. It was a neuroscientist. He said, most emotions, they're just emotions. They're just in there. You don't have to do anything with them. And I think certain emotions you want to do something with. But I think people forget this. They feel miserable, like they're going to dissolve into a puddle of their own tears. No one ever died from an emotion. But they feel-- they overwhelm us as if it's a tidal wave. It's going to pull us under and drown us. It's so interesting to me because I think what people-- listen, you have a gravitational pull. People can feel the energy. I think, yes, you're either completely badly or partially understood. There's only one guy on the planet that truly understands you. I think there's one woman, Jennifer, who probably understands you as much as anyone's going to. And then the rest of us are kind of grasping, trying to figure it out. But you're saying, go inward. So first, go inward. And then it's actions. Inward and actions. Now, the inward piece is something I'd like to just spend a little bit of time on because there are a couple of characters from history, people that were in concentration camps. Nelson Mandela. I mean, I'm not sure he had Instagram in there. I'm pretty sure he didn't. And I don't think there was anyone coaching him on, hey, you're going to get out someday. And actually, you're going to lead an entire country. I'm pretty sure that's not how it worked. He had to find it here. He had to find it between his ears. And there are other examples. But that's an important one. So the process of going inward, does it, for you-- and here, I will ask for suggestions because I think people want-- there are those of us who want to build this skill. Wall yourself off. Phone off for big portions of the day, perhaps. Texting off. The requests, the this, the that. Anyone that knows you knows that-- we've communicated a few texts, but most of it comes through a filter. She's great. She knows you. And she knows how to protect your time. DAVID GOGGINS: And that hurts people's feelings. People get mad about that. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Hey, God bless-- God bless you, Jennifer. Cutting oneself off, when you're in there, you say it's just you. And the voices that come up are not pleasant. And then at some point, it converts to action. OK. What is the process of picking the action? That's the piece that I feel like there's, like, a bridge to build here, if you can, if you would. DAVID GOGGINS: So the action being, like, what's next? ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah, so when you go to sleep at night, when that happens, you know what you're going to do the next day? It's pre-planned? DAVID GOGGINS: Yes. ANDREW HUBERMAN: OK. DAVID GOGGINS: Yes. It's always the same thing. ANDREW HUBERMAN: You're not building it on the fly. DAVID GOGGINS: No. Nothing's on the fly. So how it works internally for me is I'll put it exactly how it is. I'm an artist. And every day, I'm painting Mona Lisa. Every day. And but it's a different one. It's not the same painting. So every day I wake up, even though I'll do the same thing, it takes a different way to get there. So every day, in my mind, I'm going through my mind. I'm just like-- and a good painter will not just paint. He needs to create. And you can't create with phones and everything going around you. So you got to block yourself off. You only do two podcasts in a year. You block yourself off. And you're painting this thing inside. And you're going through all these different colors of paint and everything else. And you can only figure out the right painting if you spend the correct amount of time in your brain. So every single day, I'm literally going through my mind, and I'm painting. I'm creating this masterpiece. And the masterpiece is always myself. And but to do that, you cannot have any distractions because if you're talking to an artist and he's trying to think about the next painting, he can't. It's impossible to listen to you and listen to what your mind and body are telling you we must do. Because people don't do enough of. They don't do any of it. They don't have passion. They lack passion, drive, determination because you haven't spent time with yourself. Your mind will tell you what is next. But you haven't spent the time to go, all right, let me just figure this out. You're looking for let me Google this, and let me Google that, and let me-- you're not going to find it there because there's billions of people in this world. And they're all supposed to be individuals. But we have a pack mentality. That's why you're so fucking lost. Why am I so unique? I'm being exactly what the fuck I was supposed to be. I ain't follow shit. And when I did follow shit, I was like everybody else. The second I said, OK, man, hang on, dude, you don't like this, you don't like this, you don't like this, who are you, David Goggins? Who are you supposed to be? Miraculously, all these things just-- I couldn't even-- the list of shit I had to do, just, wham. It's like, fuck. OK. Wow. Once you sit down with yourself and say, OK, I don't want to be like Michael Jordan or Jim Brown-- they're both born on my birthday. So I looked at their birthday. I said, oh, maybe I can be one of the-- I can't. I'm going to be David fucking Goggins. And that looks like this. It just came. Everything flooded. So every single day of my life, there's a different thing that comes up that I have to do. But no one knows what to do because everybody else is following steps. Like the Republican and Democratic parties. I'm not political-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: Neither am I. DAVID GOGGINS: --at all for this reason. Republicans are going to vote Republican. Democrats are going to vote Democrat. You're not even a human fucking being, bro. No way all you fuckers agree with all the same fucking shit. And I know I don't. So once you figure out yourself and who you are, all the answers come. So every night, a different painting is being painted. And it's a beautiful painting for myself. I'm like, OK. That's it. It may look the same to most motherfuckers. But the end result is very fucking different. That's why my-- if you look at what I've done in 49 years, it's more than most people will ever do in their life because they were a race car driver. And that's what they did. They drove a fucking car. It's great. I was all kind of shit because that's exactly what the painting was saying to do. It's what the mind was saying to do. Wasn't saying just drive a car, so then that race car driver didn't know what the fuck to do. He retires from being a race car driver, and they're lost. People go, how are you still-- I don't get it. Dude, you're never going to fill your list. But you never found your list because it never was presented in front of you because your head was cluttered with shit because you never just stopped for lots of minutes, lots of years, and just said, all right, it's me and you. Let it go. And it just-- bam. It's right there. It's right there. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I'm not a psychologist, as I mentioned before. But I'm going to venture a hypothesis here. I think that you've mastered the process of internal dialogue. But when I say dialogue, I think most people think, oh, the inner voice, the chatter. But that's just one half of a dialogue. A dialogue is a two-way street. So I completely agree because I know from experience that when we go inward, oftentimes, we hear things, if we're really honest with ourselves, it's like, oh no, I don't want to think about that. No. And then we start looking outward. Or we start trying to shift our attention or distract. And there are a million reasons that are handed to us, excuses, and seemingly good justifications to be able to do that. But dialogue is a two-way street. And it hit me while you were just saying what you were saying, I was paying very close attention. And I realized David Goggins is talking about the voice that comes up, including the terrible stuff that no one wants to hear about themselves from themselves. But then he's also got the dialogue down where he knows the counter voice. He goes, yeah, you're right. And so I'm going to do this. Or maybe no, remember this. You're in a dialogue, a two-way dialogue in there, not a one-way chatter dialogue. There are books written by famous psychologists about chatter, trying to shift your internal narrative. You're like, bring the internal-- the internal narrative, that's what going inward is about. But it's not one voice. Again, there's a hypothesis. And I'm not claiming to be all-knowing. Lord knows I'm not all-knowing. But you've mastered the dialogue. And if there are three voices, strong, medium, and weak, in there, you're like, let's all come to the table. So you've got a symphony of voices in there that are all you, that you know to be you. And you know how to have those convers-- you're not afraid to be in those conversations. And then you know what the outcome of that committee decision is, and you put it into real-world action. And the world only sees the action. DAVID GOGGINS: That's it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And only you can know your internal dialogue. And only I can know my internal dialogue. And the only way to, quote unquote, "know it" is to spend a hell a lot of time there. DAVID GOGGINS: That's right. ANDREW HUBERMAN: OK. DAVID GOGGINS: A lifetime. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Got it. DAVID GOGGINS: A lifetime. Like, think about it. For me to be sitting here in front of you, you're not going to call 300-pound Ecolab guy to come sit here. You might. I don't know. Maybe. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Probably not. DAVID GOGGINS: Probably not. Think about this. What we teach people is kind, kindness to yourself. Do you think if I taught myself kindness-- and I agree with it. God, so many people-- so many people take me out of context, it's ridiculous. Take it however the fuck you want to take it. When I was 300 pounds, where do you think that conversation would that got me if I spoke kindness to myself? I'll tell you where it gets me. Right back to 7-Eleven with another box of mini chocolate donuts and a chocolate milkshake. That's the one voice. That's the one voice that most of us have that you're talking about. If you don't have a conversation in there, the other voice that you create that says, OK, how does this look? Looks very ugly. That kind conversation for me went away a long time ago, which is why the dialogue is now what you see. A lot of action. Because most people have inaction because there's one person talking. And that one person is always leading you down the same path, the path that makes you feel very comfortable and happy with yourself. The second you create the other voice, there's conflict. Just battles. Just wars. Just defeat. One thing I learned, and I taught myself this, and people go, I don't understand what you're saying, I'm going to try to break it down real quick. I didn't teach myself victory first. I taught myself failure. I taught myself how to fail. And people like, that's so depressing. Is it? When you're 300 pounds and you can't read and write and you're fucked up, you know how many times you're going to fucking fail on that process? So if you don't know how to fail, there is no victory. I never talked about winning because I knew the path to winning was going to be years of failing first. So I taught myself how to fail properly. No one teaches you how to fucking fail. But if you're going out for insurmountable fucking odds that make absolutely no fucking sense, a Black kid that can't swim, 300 pounds-- going to be a Navy SEAL. OK. You better teach yourself how to fail first because if you sit in failure for too long, you will never come out of it. So the first part of my success was learning how to fail properly. And then eventually, I started getting a few victories. But that's what people don't get. When you have buried yourself in such a deep fucking hole, you better first talk about the failures you're going to have first. And that's when that other voice comes up. It tells you, we've got to do something. But it also tells you, boy, I'm not going to lie to you, Goggins. You're in for a fucking climb, bro. You're going to get your ass handed to you, made fun of, the outside noise, the inside noise. Both voices are going to be fucking telling you to go fuck yourself. You are in for hell, bro. I am. So I better learn to fail. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So this is what you mean when you say that whatever anyone says, it's insignificant? DAVID GOGGINS: Insignificant as fuck. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It's the cap gun fire because it's just like it-- because the voice in your own head is far worse. And I should say, sorry, one of the voices in your head. I'm being very detailed, almost surgical about that because I think this thing about inner dialogue we think is one voice. But you're making it clear it's many voices. DAVID GOGGINS: It is. And the thing about it is, you have to be really-- and sometimes all the voices are telling you the wrong shit, man. But through years, years, not a podcast or listening to a book or reading a book, years of sacrifice, of suffering, of diligent pinpoint fucking work on what you want to do for yourself, not like, oh, let me just do a bunch of shit. Let me-- I want to be in every task possible. No. Pinpoint what I want to do with my life. What happens is you have all these voices that are telling you you're fucked up, and this is going to be hard. But for some reason, you put so much practice into you that you can ignore every one of them that are telling you you're not going to fucking make it. And still be able to fucking make it because you have put the practice in that you know this is the process. It's such a daunting task that all the voices are saying no. But you still have the conviction that I know I can do this. And that's what it took for me to get here. 20, 30 years ago, I had this-- 35 or whatever it was, 25 years ago, pipe dream. And ever since then, every voice was like, you're a fucking nut. But when you put that practice in every day, you lace them up. And I mean, run. It's just a metaphor for life. When you lace them motherfuckers up every day, pretty soon, you win. Pretty soon, you'll fucking win. If you have the courage and the heart and the dedication and the mindset of everybody can go fuck themselves, I know what I know. I've listened to myself enough to know. I know what I know. None of you can hear what I'm hearing. And that's what people don't do enough of. They don't listen to their journey. They listen to everybody else's shit. Before you know it, I'm crazy. But if I'm so fucking crazy, why am I so successful? How that happen? But I'm so misguided and fucked up. And don't listen to him. Why am I the only one to do a whole bunch of shit? Why am I a trailblazer? Why? How is that possible? How can you be fucked up and also self-made at the same fucking-- no. No. Obviously, you're not looking at the truth in front of you. The truth in front of you is it sucks. It's painful. It's fucking mind-numbing. And that is the truth. And that's why a lot of people don't like listening to me because this is what it takes, creating another voice and sometimes going at it alone. All the time going at it alone because no one's going to believe in you. And that's that. ANDREW HUBERMAN: What I'm about to say is not conjecture. And I can say that with confidence because I did a four-episode guest series with a brilliant psychiatrist, a guy named Paul Conti. He's from Trenton. He's a Stanford, Harvard-trained guy. He's also got a lot of street in him. He's had his own hardship, real hardship. He's brilliant. And he said something that I'll never forget, which is, we think that the forebrain, the part of our brain that creates strategy, et cetera, is the supercomputer. He said, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, no. He's like, the supercomputer of the brain is the unconscious mind. It's the part of our mind that's controlling most everything. And most people, unfortunately, don't do the work to understand how their unconscious is controlling them. And that's a scary thing, this idea, like your mind is controlling you. And I'm not going to get into the free will debate. I believe in at least some will. I believe what you're describing and this internal dialogue, I think you have access to your unconscious mind by listening to the dialogue, going inward. We know this is true in sleep, in dreams, in meditation, and just by shutting out everything else, shutting out all the external noise, which is filled with things that pull us to it. Noise makes it sound bad, but it's the gravitational pull of all the things that allow us to distract ourselves without knowing. The ice cream. The have a cookie. The Merry Christmas. The unconscious mind, this huge piece of the iceberg underneath that Paul calls the supercomputer, he's saying that with knowledge as a neurobiologist, psychiatrist, psychologist, so he really knows, that's the piece that if one does real introspection, he calls it the cupboards. You got to look in the cupboards. And it's often really scary what you find in there. And most people are just like, I don't even want to know the cupboards are there. But you're pulling all the cupboard doors open. And then you're-- and you're extremely deliberate with what gets put into action. You're not just going, oh, like, I'm pissed, so I'm going to act pissed. Or I'm tired, so I'm going to act tired. It's you're picking very carefully what to do. And that's a process that I'm guessing came to you. Does it come to you as a, OK, it makes sense why running makes sense. It makes sense why smokejumping makes sense. So it seems like a huge portion of your time is spent understanding yourself and making sense to you. And so when people don't understand you, it's got to be extra frustrating because most people don't understand themselves. So then we're all running around going, you're this, and you're that because most people are just unwilling to look inward. And I'm including myself, by the way. I mean, I've done a fair amount of introspection. But I'm inspired today, that word, inspired, but it's true, motivated to start going inward further because it is scary. It's like, we don't know what's in those cupboards, and it's terrifying, especially because we don't know. DAVID GOGGINS: And those are the first ones to open up. And like you talked about, you got to go through those cupboards. I do spring cleaning every fucking day in those dark cupboards. Those dark cabinets are the ones I start with first. That's the real me, man. That's the real me. That's why I'm not ashamed. I don't hide. I used to hide. I don't hide anymore. He's exactly right. I don't know all the fucking science behind shit. I know what I know. That's why I don't listen to anybody anymore. I don't listen to shit. I think most people are full of shit because I know. I know the deep, dark secrets of those fucking cupboards. It's ugly, man. And every day, I'm talking to them. Every day, I'm cleaning them. I'm cleaning them, and I'm talking to the same demons that came out of those fucking cupboards as I'm cleaning them. Sometimes they go right back in them again. It's not easy. And this is why most of us just-- why I am misunderstood because what comes out of those cabinets that I'm cleaning, sometimes they see on Instagram. Sometimes they'll see it in a podcast. Sometimes they see it in this one. I turn people off. Open up your own cabinets. And then go talk about it. Let me see how pretty it looks. Let me see how pretty you sound. Let me see how put together your words are. I bet you a fuck or a motherfucker comes out because for you to go back in there again to clean the same fucking cabinet that the demon came out of takes some big balls, bro. To do it every day of your life. To go back in there and spring clean every day, not once a fucking year, once every decade. Every day you know it gets dusty. And every day, you don't start with the victories. You don't go, oh, this is nice. Look at my-- look at my I love me wall. Let me clean up. This is a little dusty. No. I go right for the things that are going to keep me buried. And I go right there first because if I don't clean those out first, the day doesn't start. So what are you saying to me is truth. And like I told you many times today, I can never figure out how to explain this shit to people because I'm not neuro nothing. I'm just a guy that said, OK, we got to start in the dungeon. And we got to stay here for the rest of our lives. For you to become successful, the dungeon is a place that has to be clean. And it's the scariest place to be. That's why I'm misunderstood because I'm speaking from the dungeon. That's why I am successful because I go there every damn day. And that is the truth, what he says. It's the exact truth. Those cabinets are fucking dusty, dirty, and scary as shit. Broken glass, fucking dark, spiders, cobwebs. But most of all, your biggest fears, the biggest things that put you in a fucked up place you are today are in there. That's why we all like to keep them shut. You like to lock them up. Act like they never happened. That's why you never grow. You never improve. You never have real conversations like we're having right now. Never. Never. Oh no. No, no, no, no, no. Let's not-- no, no, no. Let's not go there. I talked to so many people who tell me that. Let's talk about this. Because they'll tell me, but they can only say it once. And they'll say it in passing. They won't get deep in the weeds with it. Like, you can't just clean it. Motherfucker, you got to spit shine that motherfucker. You got to relive it, every fucking detail of it. You can't just be like, oh yeah, yeah, my dad beat me. And it is what it is. It ain't is what it is, motherfucker. It's killing you. It's taken over your whole fucking life. But that's the conversation. Yeah, my dad beat-- but I'm fine now, though. I'm good. OK. All right. No, you ain't. You ain't fine. You ain't fine. This is real talk. People don't have that. So your boy's right. 100% right. Scary as shit. It's scary as shit. But it makes you who you're supposed to be. And that's the test. We forget. We think we're supposed to breathe air and have kids and pay the bills and shit. But what's this life about? That makes no sense. We're being tested, my friend. Tests come when you have not studied. Tests come when you think that you're in a great place. That's the test. The test is every day of your life. And most of us fail because we don't know why we're here because we don't go inward to say, oh. You gave me a lot of shit to fix, man. And this test sucks. But then you start. ANDREW HUBERMAN: David Goggins. I don't think I could add to that. I know I can't. Thank you for sharing what you shared today. I mean, as much as your process or anyone's process can't be completely understood from the outside, you gave us a real window into this thing, this process that you-- as you said, God put it on you. I believe in God too. People can believe what they want. But somehow, your life, God gave you these challenges early on. And then there was a point where you went internal. And like you said, you developed a skill. But it's a perishable skill. And you clearly live in the process of opening those cupboards, reopening those cupboards, trying to spit shine those cupboards, understanding that they're never, ever really done, but that you can gain ground on them, that you can win day after day after day. And you really shared a lot of concrete things that I know people are going to be able to apply if they choose. And I agree with you. I think most people will be like, whoa. That was a lot. It's heavy. I think I want to just kind of bake myself in Netflix and Chex Mix instead. But there's also the reality that there are men and women, boys and girls who hear that and go, OK, and start cracking the cupboards open. And I just know that for myself, I'm extremely grateful that you're willing to put it all out there. You're so brutally honest, so brutally authentic. That word authenticity gets thrown around so much. And I can tell you that for me and for everybody else, that's really what resonates. So whether or not you want to, whether or not it's the purpose behind it or not, you're lighting the path. So thank you. DAVID GOGGINS: Respect Thank you. Thanks for having me. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with David Goggins. To learn more about David and to find links to his two fantastic books, "Can't Hurt Me," and "Never Finished," please see the show note captions. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five-star review. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you have questions or comments about the Huberman Lab podcast, or if you have suggestions about guests or topics that you'd like me to cover, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. Not on today's episode, but on many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab podcast, we discuss supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like improving sleep, for hormone support, and for focus. If you'd like to learn more about the supplements discussed on the Huberman Lab podcast, please go to Live Momentous, spelled O-U-S. So that's livemomentous.com/huberman. If you're not already following me on social media, I am hubermanlab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, Twitter, Threads, X, LinkedIn, and Facebook. And on all those platforms, I discuss science and science-related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the content on the Huberman Lab podcast. So again, it's hubermanlab on all social media platforms. If you haven't already subscribed to our Neural Network newsletter, I encourage you to do so. It is completely zero cost. And it provides podcast summaries and protocols in the form of brief PDFs of one to three pages, things like deliberate cold exposure, protocol for foundational fitness, protocol for deliberate heat exposure, for managing dopamine, for optimizing your sleep, and so on and so on. Again, completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu, scroll down to Newsletter, and click on the Newsletter tab. And you enter your email to sign up. But I should point out that we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you, once again, for joining me for today's discussion with the one and only David Goggins. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [MUSIC PLAYING]

========================================

--- Video 159 ---
Video ID: zbpb1wd-wvs
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zbpb1wd-wvs
Title: AMA #14: 2023 Philanthropy, Evening Routine, Light Therapy, Health Metrics & More
Published: 2023-12-31 20:45:01 UTC
Description:
Welcome to a special edition of the 14th Ask Me Anything (AMA) episode, part of Huberman Lab Premium. This episode is a recording of a live stream AMA, originally exclusive to our Annual and Lifetime Members. We've decided to make the full-length version available to everyone, including non-members of Huberman Lab Premium.

Huberman Lab Premium was launched for two main reasons. First, it was launched in order to raise support for the main Huberman Lab podcast — which will continue to come out every Monday at zero-cost. Second, it was launched as a means to raise funds for important scientific research. A significant portion of proceeds from the Huberman Lab Premium subscription will fund human research (not animal models) selected by Dr. Huberman, with a dollar-for-dollar match from the Tiny Foundation.

If you're not yet a member but enjoyed this full-length livestream AMA, we invite you to join Huberman Lab Premium at https://www.hubermanlab.com/premium. By subscribing, you'll gain access to exclusive benefits including our regular monthly full-length AMA episodes, AMA transcripts, podcast episode transcripts, early access to live events and more. Additionally, a significant portion of your membership proceeds contributes to advancing human scientific research. You can learn more about the research we were able to support in our Annual Letter 2023: https://www.hubermanlab.com/annual-letter/2023.

If you're a Huberman Lab Premium member, you can access the transcript for this AMA episode here: https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/ama-14-2023-philanthropy-evening-routine-light-therapy-health-metrics-more

Timestamps
00:00:00 Introduction
00:00:34 2023 Scientific Research Contributions
00:07:07 Anterior Mid Cingulate Cortex Studies: Discussion on Research & Findings
00:12:32 Evening Routines and Light: Insights on Managing Light Exposure Before Sleep
00:21:26 Light Therapy in Northern Regions: Tips for Coping With Limited Morning Light
00:28:48 Annual Health and Fitness Metrics: Key Metrics to Monitor Yearly
00:39:59 Dealing With Midnight Wakefulness: Strategies for Falling Back Asleep
00:46:41 Strength Training for Women: Protocols for Strength Without Hypertrophy
00:50:56 Full Body Scan MRIs: Evaluating the Benefits and Usage
00:55:07 Dog Wellness and Communication: Potential Exploration Into Canine Well-Being
00:56:17 Balancing Muscle Strength: Strategies for Equalizing Arm Strength
01:00:54 Content on Children's Development: Future Plans and Current Resources
01:03:23 Conclusion & Thank You

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

#HubermanLab #Science #AMA

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

The Huberman Lab podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine we are now live today with our annual and lifetime members of The hubman Lab podcast premium channel and first off I just want to welcome everyone thanks so much for being here I hope you're having a good holidays and I'll uh wish you a happy new year at this point and again at the end I want to kick off our discussion today by just highlighting some of the incredible things that you all have already done the premium channel as most of you presumably know provides support for important research and when I say important research we can Define that as research that is done on humans with humans with their consent of course that we believe stands the highest probability of leading to New Quality treatments and improvements in mental health physical health and performance so support from the premium channel that is from you has already allowed us to make several substantial gifts to various Laboratories as well as some other um some other endeavors so I'll just quickly tell you where those funds have gone and then I'll tell you something really truly exciting about where we're headed in 2024 we'll get to the questions in a moment but I think this is important to hear first of all we made a um a year-long gift and when I say year-long gift we're talking gifts that I certainly can say from my perspective as a researcher who's run a laboratory for a very long time these are the size gifts that allow researchers to do research that they otherwise would not have been able to do they pay salaries they pay uh for materials in the laboratory they pay for the sorts of things that allow signs to happen that would not otherwise happen we made a gift to Dr Aaliyah crumbs laboratory at Stanford in the department of psychology uh she studies mindset some of you may have seen the episode with Ally as she's called um Dr Crum on the hubman Lab podcast she's studying mindsets and how they affect both mental health and physical health in children and adults and that work hopefully we'll get a report back on at some point soon about how those mindsets can improve performance in school work Athletics and other areas of life so the idea here is that you supported that work through the premium channel and then that work can happen and then we can get the information about what the conclusions of that work are out into the general population meaning into the public so that people can benefit from that knowledge right away and in many cases Implement that knowledge we also made a gift to Dr sain Panda at the Suk Institute for biological study sain panda is an expert in circadian biology and intermittent fasting and the study he is using those funds for relates to intermittent fasting as a specific tool for improving mental health we also made a gift to Dr Carla shatz in at Stanford University School of Medicine she's studying how the immune system and maternal conditions and in especially infections or uh of various kinds that um pregnant women sometimes encounter or get can affect the developing fetal brain and that work also relates to stem cells I know there's a lot of excitement about stem cells nowadays so I'll give you an update on that as soon as I can we also made a substantial gift to Dr Joanna Stein glass at Columbia University School of Medicine Dr Stein glass has not yet been on the podcast but hopefully she will have time to come on the podcast at some point soon uh she's studying and developing novel treatments for eating disorders uh if you didn't see the episode on healthy and disordered eating um sadly uh anorexia nervosa is the most deadly of all the psychiatric conditions that is a great number of patients that have anorexia nervosa unfortunately go on to die of uh malnourishment and things related to malnourishment so it's a critical critical issue that's not talked about enough and frankly is not um well funded enough at the level of federal funding but um through your support there's now funding um siphoning into her laboratory and she's directing those funds directly at novel treatments based on neuroscience and habit formation for eating disorders anorexia and other Eating Disorders Dr Nolan Williams also at Stanford who does work on transcranial magnetic stimulation which is a tool to non-invasively alter neural circuits in the brain uh for purposes of relieving depression and PTSD and excitingly Dr Williams laboratory also combines TMS transcranial magnetic stimulation with psychedelic treatments um in particular ibaan but also psilocybin I know there's a lot of excitement about that and then last but certainly not least uh we also funded a chronobiology conference they were um desperate for funds uh reached out and we were delighted to provide the funds for that uh conference those funds allowed graduate students in postdocs who come from from Laboratories that couldn't afford to send those students in post talks to that conference to attend that conference and I must say from a lot of years of experience in the scientific Community the ability to attend these high quality meetings is absolutely critical for those young scientists to be able to glean important information and go back to their own Laboratories and to make novel contributions also can be the difference between a new collaboration getting sparked up or not and uh I should just mention that the the Research Laboratories that we fund were at a much higher level than the conferences but the conferences I think are also a really important um way to direct funds uh for those of you who don't know chronobiology is how the timing of light temperature and exercise and eating affect health so all things that I think uh people are interested in so uh that's it for what we covered um and what we supported in 2023 we're very proud of the support that we were able to provide thanks to your help and I am very very excited to announce that while in 2023 it was scom us the hubman Lab podcast through your premium uh Channel support that allows us to make that support and we had a matching donation dollar Ford dooll donation from the tiny Foundation heading into 2024 tiny Foundation is going to continue to do a dollar dollar a dollar Ford dooll match excuse me which is exciting and we've brought on in addition to that two other donors who are going to also do dollar for dooll donations so in other words for every dollar that the Hub lab premium channel has or raises in 2024 there will be $3 to match that so this is phenomenal and what it means is that the scom and hubman Lab podcast are now doing what's considered on University campuses as major philanthropy so very exciting um and so thank you Oho very much for your support you are making a difference in the research and I don't just say that I know anytime there's fundraisers things of that sort by the way this is not a fundraiser This Is Us saying thank you to you but it's always hard to know where those funds go and um we make sure that the whole process is very streamlined we cut the fat on the on it in every Dimension so that um the money can go to discovering new tools for mental health physical health and performance so thank you so much okay first question is up carollyn a writes I am interested in studies about the anterior mid singulate cortex oh yes such an interesting structure would you please share any information regarding those thank you for all you do in the advancement of science thank you for all you do in the advancement of science Carolyn and others listening okay so the enter mid single cortex for those of you that um may not have seen the episode on Willpower and tenacity but even if you have is a region of the brain that is involved in leaning into difficult challenges of all kinds this is an area of the brain that gets larger when we Embrace effort that leads to a bit of internal anxiety but it's something that's good for us an Adaptive thing and this is an area of the brain that gets smaller when we don't engage in challenging Endeavors now we need to Define challenging Endeavors very specifically challenging Endeavors that stimulate the growth of the anterior mid singulate cortex are challenging Endeavors that we would prefer not to do we may want the end goal right so we may want the the consequence of the exercise the consequence of the learning the consequence of whatever the challenge is but that the challenge itself feels uncomfortable and here of course we want it to be uh uncomfortable but safe challenges is what is what's going to grow the inter mid singulate cortex now another thing about the inter mid singulate cortex that's important is that for people that end up being successful diet or successful um pursuit of Fitness for people that um complete a degree or finish an exam or things of that sort the intering cortex gets bigger for people that fail to do the work required to prepare so the preparation that is uh the Anor Ming lit cortex actually shows a bit of atrophy so the Anor Ming lit cortex is an anatomical and neural reflection of willpower and tenacity and I think what people get wrong over and over about the sorts of findings is that the anterior mid singit cortex is really responding to a variety of inputs as a lot of different inputs and outputs we know that based on neural circuit tracing but it absolutely responds best to things that feel like that they are indeed difficult that they are a challenge so if you're like me and you enjoy certain forms of exercise and it's just pure Bliss for you the whole way through that's not going to grow your anti mid singulate cortex however if you add a bit of let's say uh higher intensity work I like doing a long run or hike on Sundays I don't do Sprints too often at the end of that uh but if I were to do a couple Hill Sprints at the end and I really was like ah this this is rough this sucks that's actually the sort of thing that's going to stimulate the anterior mid singulate cortex the anterior mid singulate cortex since Caroline you asked about studies was actually uh discovered in cases where people were stimulating this brain area and the subjects these were people receiving neurosurgery for other reasons reported feeling like something was impending some not impending doom but there was some challenge like they were going to head into a storm something challenging was coming but the other subjective feeling that they reported was feeling like they could lean into it like they're ready for it they're ready to meet that challenge so what you're looking for when you are interested in growing your inter singulate cortex I'll tell you why that's a good thing to do is you're looking for that feeling of Leaning into challenge that friction if something's too easy or it's too delightful that's not going to contribute to your ID singulate cortex function and growth I might contribute to other things indeed it will um and life isn't all about leaning into challenge but why would you want to stimulate your anterior mid singulate cortex in this way and by the way those challenges can come from physical Endeavors it can come from language learning it come from a hard conversation that you're um you've been putting off that's hard for you to have Lord knows we all all have those aspects of Our Lives the things that we're putting off or that are hard for us or that feel difficult again keep these Endeavors safe never want to do anything that would damage your mental health or physical health but leaning into challenge in that way does seem to activate and grow the enter mid singulate cortex now the advantages of that is that there are studies excuse me showing that the so-called superagers um the superagers I don't like that name so much it should it's a bit of a misnomer they call them super agers but they really should be called super non- aers because these are people who seem to maintain healthy cognitive function much longer than most individuals their memory their IQ is remains stable into their much much later Decades of their life or even improves over time and then the correlation and again this is correlation but these are these people's interior mid singulate cortex does not atrophy and in general what the studies point to and there still needs to be more data collected on this is that these people are regularly engaging in things that are hard for them and challenging and they've embraced that challenge so lots to say about interior mid singulate cortex uh but I think uh that grabs the top contour and um I'm a big fan of trying to do something difficult at least one thing uh ideally every week um and perhaps even every day a little bit it doesn't take much uh maybe even just five minutes it's that friction that feeling oh I don't want to do this I can't do this and then continuing to practice or continuing to lean into that challenge safely of course uh that is going to grow that anid signate cortex and I just think that's amazing right we hear so much about brain atrophy and memory loss and etc etc as we get older a lot of data now about how to preserve health healthy physical function here we're really talking about how to maintain healthy cognitive function and the interent mid singulate cortex seems to be barometer of how well we are doing that Mark s asks would love to hear more about an evening routine and not just morning especially when it comes to light oh I love this question I love this question because I've made a lot of changes in the last year related to this because um you know there's this guy on the internet that talks about the importance of getting morning sunlight I'm just kidding um there are several of us but um and gals but um I I suppose I've been quite vocal about the importance of getting morning sunlight as soon as possible after waking and of course of course of course unless you have powers I'm not aware of if you wake up before the sun comes out people always ask what do I do you wait till the sun comes out if it's overcast you get outside a bit longer if you want to wake up before the sun comes out turn on bright artificial lights now these days I've actually been playing around a little bit with some bright artificial lights um before I because I tend to wake up before the sun is out it's the winter months but in any case I've talked a lot about the morning routine in the early part of the day and a bit about the afternoon uh part of the day evening routine okay well I'll tell you ideal and then I'll tell you what I do um I'm always shooting for ideal but I'm human I think there's this idea on the internet um that I've seen that you know my whole life is is protocols protocol protocol protocol and indeed sometimes it looks like that and indeed sometimes it doesn't I'm human things happen um we all encounter different challenges so to answer your question directly Mark I think it's I know it's very important that if possible that you get a little splash of sunlight in your eyes in the afternoon and evening why why is that important and what we're really talking about here is not necessarily seeing a sunset at the beach although that would be great if you could do that but getting some sunlight in your eyes before the sun goes down maybe for 5 10 minutes it's not as important as the morning sunlight but it does have a great benefit and the benefit is it adjusts the sensitivity of the neurons in your retina and in your brain such that it protects you against brighter artificial lights later in the evening now it doesn't protect you completely but what it does is if normally and this is true bright light viewed for 15 seconds or more between the hours of 10: p.m and 400 a.m. I'm talking about somebody on a standard schedule not shift worker Bright Lights viewed for 15 seconds or more between the hours of 10: p.m. and 4:00 a.m. can dramatically quash melatonin levels melatonin being the hormone that's involved in feeling sleepy and falling asleep it does other things as well of course it's secreted from the pineal we know based on a really nice study publish in science reports that if you view that afternoon late afternoon evening sunlight you don't have to be too strict about the time get you know pop your sunglasses off as long as you can do that safely get some sunlight in your eyes or if you can't look directly at the Sun and by the way never stare directly at the Sun at least getting some daylight in your eyes before the sun goes down that can offset that melatonin reduction by about 50 % which is pretty impressive now you would still do well to dim the lights in the evening and and one thing that I've been playing with recently is uh using red lights so um a lot of people when they hear red lights they think oh you're talking about you know Red Light Panel which that has its uses those tend to be very bright red lights or um you know portable red light I actually use a small portable red light looks like a piece of thick piece of toast um I use that for other reasons this is not what we're talking about with evening routine with evening routine it can be beneficial and very very costeffective to get some red bulbs and put them in say the bedroom where you read before you go to sleep or in a particular room in your house you tend to spend time in in the evening makes for a nice mellow feel but it also does several other things first of all it if they're the correct red bulbs and I'll mention the ones that I've been using in a moment they uh eliminate all the blue wavelengths that tend to be stimulating for the what we call the noradrenergic system so adrenaline noradrenaline cortisol Etc indeed there's a study shows that when shift workers who have to be up at night use red lights of the type that I'm describing when they work under red light they have less of a cortisol increase than were they to work under standard fluorescent lights or even standard LED lights so number one thing would be dim the lights in the evening and at night as much as you safely can to perform whatever functions you need don't fall you know don't burn yourself at the stove you know if you have to Rite and do work as I often do you need light uh but to the extent that you can shift to Red Lights uh that can be helpful and many people many people and myself included find that you get sleepier when you do that so I might just do this for the last hour of the evening even if I'm up till 10 or 11: or if I do it earlier then I tend to get really sleepy but those red lights um you know I put have a little lamp above my bed I'll do that if I'm going to read in bed I make it much easier to fall asleep probably because of the reduced cortisol associated with eliminating the blue wavelengths and they tend to be fairly dim and um now there's one brand of red light that um you actually can that actually will work on a dimmer so this is important um I suppose you could use a red party lights or Christmas lights those could be very affordable um some people do that put kind of festive uh feel in the room other people like myself um will um use a red light that's dimmable I want to mention that what I'm about to say I don't have any Financial relationship to this company in terms of the bulbs um red light panels are different I use the ju um I use ju type but for red lights that uh for the purpose I'm talking about that would go into a standard lamp and that you Dim where has a very different purpose right the red light panels have a very different purpose than than red bulbs that you would put into a standard light fixture uh the dimmable ones um are called they you can find them as red light you just put Bon um it's a the uh technical name uh of the company is um sorry forgive me for Googling this now yeah it's a bond charge b n separate word charge um and those are dimmable and they have the prop ER wavelength so that's what I use um they're not super cheap but they're not expensive either in in comparison to most uh red light therapies or something so we're not talking about red light therapy we're talking about reducing the overall amount of blue light in your environment Etc now for many people who don't want to purchase something new and again I have no Financial relationship to bond charge so I don't glean any thing I buy them with my own money and I just have one or two of them and I dim the lights even those red lights I dim while I'm reading at night and then fall asleep if you don't want to use red lights for whatever reason then you would be wise to just dim the lights that you have and we possible to have those lights be set fairly low in your room environment now why would that be okay well first of all the cells that activate the alertness system uh in the brain through via the retina your eye um tend to look up into your environment and that makes sense because they're essentially there to view sunlight and the the presence or absence of sunlight but in addition to that think about it logically if I take a flashlight and I shine a beam on the ground or at a tree in the yard it looks very bright but you're not getting all those photons in your eyes right you're seeing it at a distance as opposed to shining the light in your eyes it's very very bright okay so when you have lights that are overhead and going into your eyes it's very different than the light being on the floor or on a Surface this gets back to something that I often get asked how could it be that viewing sunlight through a window takes 50 times longer to activate your circadian system than it does when you step outside well let's think about that when you step outside there's sunlight everywhere if you face the sun there's even more coming at you but when you're inside unless there's a beam of light coming through that window and the window is very clear or open for that matter you're not really getting the light in your eyes in the same way that if you're outside with the sunlight in your eyes right it's the same thing as like looking at a beam of light from a flashlight against a wall versus the beam of light going at your eyes okay so we talked about um dimming the lights setting them low in the room the I it's not red light therapy but changing over to Red Lights Bon charge is probably just one of many out there I've seen it done pretty nicely with just somebody um people grab red party lights go on whatever your favorite search engine sales site red lights and you could do that that's going to be better than any blue lights and then if you're going to be on your screens here's what I suggest there's a short cut function in your phone where you can triple click to switch your phone over to eliminate all the blues this is very different than just using the nighttime function very different and um I think we should probably put out a video on how to do this but what you do is you go into the accessibility function on your phone you go into to color filters and then you drag down the the blues but that's not how your phone is going to be set all day CU then you don't see anything that's in blue but you can introduce a triple click function I'll put out a clip soon on how to do that and so when I go to sleep at night or in the evening what I'll do is I'll triple click and I'll switch my phone over to uh to Red only and uh that's completely zero cost by the way it doesn't cost anything and then in the morning when I wake up it click cck click and turn on although I try and get the sunlight in my eyes before I look at my phone okay Tom M asks light therapy recommendations for those that live in northern regions with limited morning light or too cold to get outside for Morning Light Dark when waking do red light therapy great question I'm going to take a sip of this bone broth because at the rate I'm speaking if I try and keep this up for an hour and a half I I might um get a little horse red light therapy is different than what I just described red light therapy is the use of red light panels can be smaller panels like the small ju that I use which is a unit it's about the size of a piece I guess they call it Texas tote toast right they Texas a thick piece of toast I don't know maybe someone knows why it's called Texas toast um I guess it's big um it's about the size of a piece of toast provides very bright red light and in between those red lights on there there tends to be near infrared light so far red so um you know to a biologist red doesn't mean as much as the wavelength of light so wavelengths in like the 650 to 800 nanometers is what we're talking about whereas blue light is down in the you know four and 500s and really like 535 to you know low sixes um you know like the rainbow right um red orange green blue um there are also larger red light panels and nowadays I also see a lot of um advertisements for red light panels you can actually lie down in red light beds here's the story red lights will often be marketed as the most powerful the most intensity the most locks most important is the proper wavelengths or are the proper wavelengths so that's why I use the ju because ju has the proper wavelengths of red and far red the distance to view a red light of that sort generally is about 18 in sometimes a little closer now sometimes people would put red light on different parts of their body I covered a bit of this in the light and health episode but red light because it's longer wavelength light can permeate through tissues to fairly substantial depth how deep depends on the tissue if you put it up against your skull is it going to get down into your brain no it's not going to get through your skull maybe a little bit if it's a very high-powered red light if you're holding a red light of that power at home something's wrong I don't that's a medical that's a medical device however ju are medical grade red light and near infrared lights and they um are quite powerful they're the right wavelengths actually that's why I prefer ju because they are um they are medical grade um they can be directed at your eyes in the morning for the purpose of there's a a study out of two studies is actually out of Glen Jeff laboratory at the University of College London showing that viewing red lights at a distance of about 18 in or so in the morning for people who are over 40 but not for people younger by the way that can offset some of the age related reductions in mitochondrial function and vision loss so I look at a red light in this ju my ju Texas toast light or I have a ju panel um at a distance of about I confess I stand about 12 to to 18 inches away and I do not force myself to look at that light I don't hold my eyelids open I allow myself to Blink so I'm comfortable truth told you could probably close your eyelids and some of that red light is going to get through your eyelids not a ton but some so no problem blinking you never ever ever want to look at any light sunlight or otherwise red light any light so bright that it's painful to look at if you have to Blink it's too bright step back if you have to Blink every once in a while that's okay but if you have to Blink in order to to close your eyes in order to protect your eyes then you're standing too close in the morning you can do red light therapy on skin you can do it on eyes will it wake your system up will it provide the kind of uh cortisol increase which by the way you want early in the day and adrenaline and dopamine increase that sunlight can provide the answer is no sunlight is unique in that way however if you live in an area of the world that's too dark or um you wake up long before you get sunlight in your eyes what can you do well you can flip on artificial lights you would do that the opposite of how I recommend in the evening you'd want to flip on overhead lights as bright as possible if you um have the disposable income and you want to invest in a 10,000 Lux Light Panel or 900 Lux Light Panel again I have no Financial relationship to these companies but um there's a light panel 900 Lux drawing tablet that I've set on my desk for a number of years recently I confess I've started um uh experimenting with some of the 10,000 Lux light panels that sit on your Des desk excuse me those are very very bright and I do use that now if I wake up really early and I'm going to do some work I'll turn that thing on and it sure wakes you up now is it as good as sunlight no it doesn't have the right color features and alternation between yellow and blue that morning sunlight has and that evening sunlight has and without doing a whole tutorial when the sun is low in the sky So-Cal low solar angle sunlight you'll notice if you take a picture with your phone provid it's not a cloudy day you'll see that there's a lot of blue yellow contrast and that's the optimal stimulus that said if it's overcast out you should still get outside because some of those W lengths are coming through even though you can't perceive the blue and the yellow so these you could get a 10,000 Lux light but if you can't afford that or you don't want to oh and by the way those you you set on your desk you turn on for 5 10 minutes while you're making coffee and things of that sort they actually recommend that you don't keep them on too much some people actually can feel a little too euphoric or maybe even get a little headache because it's a lot of blue light so that's one thing the other thing you can do is that if you can't uh uh access light of any kind just dark dark dark that's where the cold shower really can help because you get that adrenaline bump um early in the day which is good so early in the day you know provided you're not going into states of anxiety as a consequence of it getting adrenaline dopamine cortisol increases is great and then as the day goes on in the evening and night time certainly you want to taper the levels of those neurochemicals off now of course there's always going to be some cortisol there's always going to be some epinephrine there'll always be dopamine your system if you go out dancing you go to a party at night should you worry about the lights no okay I am not despite what you might presume or hear or read I am not uh the sort of person who wear sunglasses at a party although the other day I was at a party and someone was wearing sunglass I think it was for other reasons the um the that that gives the impression there was something bad going on I think they were just like looking cool by the way um and they did look cool but I don't do that and if I drive at night I don't wear I don't wear um sunglasses I do and I have been exploring the use of blue light filter glasses in the evening and those red lights in my house but for I think for most people if you get out every once in a while you go out to a late night you go out dancing you have a party with friends you know you get home dim the lights maybe use those red lights get to sleep early in the day Bright Lights ideally from sunlight bright bright bright bright bright how bright as bright as possible and as many as you uh is reasonable except to the extent that it could damage your eyes so don't be staring at any Bright Lights excessively okay I think that that pretty much summarizes it and then of course early day it's really about sunlight or light of other kinds cold water if that's your thing if that's not your thing that's fine there was no tablet that uh descended down to us telling us that we had to get into cold water each day it's an option it's all an option Dennis from Munich I love Munich haven't been there in a while but I used to go in MOX plunk Munich for a number of um times per year and I missed the food I missed the Schnitzel as we approach a new year what health and fitness metrics do you recommend checking oh good one and could you share your annual medical Fitness check routine okay um what I'm about to say I'm sure will um generally jive with what Dr Peter AA who I'm sure you all know and who I um respect tremendously also grateful to call him a close friend uh basically asserts is important for Fitness um I think if you're going to do a fitness test you know Peter's got it in mind and I generally agree you know you deadlift your body weight 10 times in the same set hang from a bar for a minute or more okay in the same set um these sorts of things I tend to be far less PE class about it frankly uh my goal is always the same I'm 48 years old I've been doing the same training program ever since I was 16 more or less I mean I've had you know you know Peaks and valleys in terms of my consistency based on other obligations and of course when I'm sick I don't train sick people stay out of gyms please nothing makes me more frustrated than people showing up to get their work out and getting everybody sick here's the deal I try to be capable that is ready for various things what the ability to go on a long hike what's a long hike 5 to 10 miles with some hills the ability to Sprint for the airplane without blowing a gasket the ability or that means hurting oneself or having a heart attack the ability to carry some heavy furniture with assistance safely or God forbid to take a trip and not damage myself and of course to have some level of agility and uh coordination so how do how does one do that so what Health Fitness metrics do I recommend checking well I'm going to do this next week because it's the end of the year but pretty much every week it's the following three cardiovascular training sessions one is long meaning an hour to 90 minutes that's going to be slow for me so this could be a weighted hike so waight vested hike or you could just put some weight in a backpack just be a hike if it's really steep or a long slow jog once a week for me it's jogging or hiking for other people cycling or swimming sometime in the middle of week I'm doing a 35 minute run so maybe five minutes of warmup and then a faster 35 minute run you could also do it on a rower you could also do it on a bike but you're really pushing up around I don't know maybe I I don't tend to measure heart rate but where it's I could not hold a conversation I'm working I'm working working I'm not sprinting but I'm working and then another time during the week a shorter workout of about 12 minutes it's going to be 3 minutes of warm-up some calisthenics a little bit of cycling on an assault bike or something of that sort assault bikes are the ones where you have the handles with the fan or it could be a rower or it could be any sprinting a hill and then doing sometimes one minute on one minute off for 12 minutes sometimes doing 20 seconds on 10 seconds off for eight rounds and it's real work it's getting the heart rate all the way up VO2 max the combination of those three three types of cardiovascular training sessions are that I'm ready to Sprint for the airplane I'm ready to take a long hike anytime I'm I can go out for a two mile run and really enjoy that if I if I need to it's a Readiness thing and I think it covers all bases am I ever going to be a marathoner or a champion sprinter with that or a Myer no but that's not my goal and it never has been I ran a cross country race in high school and we tell out story another time it was a lot of funun until I hit the second mile the other thing I do three times a week is I work out with resistance training I train my legs one day so that's calves hamstrings quads I train my torso so that's I do some pushing for my shoulders and upper chest and some dips that kind of thing some pull-ups some rowing this sort of thing and I train my neck because I'm a big believer in that for the upper spine but um don't don't go at it heavy it's just really to maintain you know uh posture and to make sure that upper upper spine is supported something that most people neglect and then one day a week I do smaller body parts like I'll do my Cal train my calves again biceps triceps I'll make sure that if they're any small body parts that happen to miss during the middle of the week because of scheduling like rear delts or something I'll do that maybe a little bit more neck work or some ab work okay those are spread out about a day apart I don't get too obsessed with the spacing between those workouts but they're not all stacked against one another so it might be in my case it's it's long run on Sunday this is just how I do it Monday tends to be off uh excuse me long run on Sunday or hike Monday is legs excuse me Monday is always legs Tuesday off Wednesday I generally would do that shorter run or the Torso work I flip-flop them depending on how my legs are feeling and the next day I do whatever I need to do either the Torso resistance training or the or the 35 minute run and then Friday is that faster clip cardio Saturday tends to be the smaller body parts biceps triceps Etc I must say these days of the week always have the ability ability to slide when we or the other so for instance if I'm traveling and I don't get back on Sunday until late I'll if I was not able to do that training while I was on the road then I will do it on Monday and then I'll just slide things around so that I finish off the week with everything done and I can get back on schedule but the way I've arranged it every body part gets hit twice once directly once indirectly and the cardiovascular training is is covers all bases why train this way well it ensures strength it ensures whatever aesthetic changes you want you can emphasize working harder in more sets perhaps for the things that you you know want to bring up certain body parts that are that are weaker you can um certainly recover because you're only training legs once a week but guess what you're you're doing them on Monday and you're sprinting on Friday so they're getting hit indirectly on Friday even if it's on the bike though that fast hard pedaling with resistance is going to make sure that your legs aren't going to atrophy you can still get butt you can still train them again on Monday again so this schedule is designed in a very specific way none of the workouts except the longer workout on Sunday that jog or Runner is longer than an hour ever it's 10 minutes of warmup and 5050 minutes of work in the gym sometimes 60 sometimes I'll truncate it to 45 or 40 if I'm really I have a bunch of things going on so this sort of schedule sounds like a lot but it's not it's actually a very small investment it's about an hour a day and not even on Tuesday which is a rest day so what are the metrics that I recommend checking well I'm a big believer that if you're sleeping well and your appetite is consistent and you're feeling generally good that's an important metric it's a very subjective metric but that's important are you sleeping well or are you waking up sore and you're not able to recover are you feeling like no matter how much sleep you get you can't feel rested these kinds of things now there could be other factors involved but that's the you know sort of a basic one the other one is how much energy and pep are you bringing to your workouts that's important and it relate to caffeine and fueling and all those sorts of things which we're not talking about right now it's far too much to talk about here but we did Cover in the foundational Fitness protocol by the way all of this is put into a PDF that's available online at hberman lab.com zeroc cost simply go to the newsletter T tab under the menu and you can scroll down um below that find the foundational Fitness protocol gets into sets and Reps and loads and all that kind of stuff completely zero cost I do take my morning resting pulse rate I know what my pulse rate ought to be if it's elevated substantially and I'm not particularly stressed about something then I might pay attention to that and back off a little bit on the intensity on things if I have a throat Tickler I'm not feeling very well I'm really careful about working out sometimes I'll do it sometimes I won't I'll make sure that isn't just some sort of like dust or allergen in the environment but if I'm feeling under the weather I'll take I'll just skip I just skipped that workout and some people go oh you you skip because you're you know I'll be honest I'm 48 been training very consistently I am fortunately knock on wood a little bit suspicious knock on wood I have avoided major injuries I've been able to train consistently and I've also don't tend to succumb to colds and flu I think about once every 18 to 24 months I've had colder flu of some sort for for many years that's been the the kind of cadence but not more frequent than that I think in part because I don't tend to push really hard when I'm sick I tend to be the guy who goes all right I'm feeling kind of under the weather should I train maybe not okay I'm going to take a hot shower and get in bed at 6 PM read and go to sleep if I wake up at 3:00 a.m. because I went to bed too early just chill in bed and read maybe fall back asleep maybe not I think taking care of oneself in that way is very beneficial and then people say well you haven't had kids well I've had kids in the house and I also know what it is to get sick because of roommates and all this stuff and working with people and working in a medical center you're always exposed to things so um I hear you loud and clear we can't avoid exposure to um infectious vectors as they're called um delightful in the form of kids but uh the reality is I try and back off when I'm not feeling well I push when I'm feeling good I'm not one to do two a day workouts and I'm very careful about not exceeding my my program I'm very careful about that that I don't go crazy I don't do two Pilates classes then go to the gym and I'm also not the guy who's complaining about his back or always being sick and I do not have you know like phenomenal genetics for with respect to Fitness you I'm small jointed or relatively have mediumsized joints you know I'm not particularly strong nor do I have particularly strong endurance you know I think I'm kind of in the middle so in terms of medical Fitness check I do blood work every six months I find that to be that has identified a few things that for me needed taken care of and I pay a lot of attention to overall feelings of well-being and I chart them frankly I on my calendar it's my are my workouts I put the level I put like L1 to 10 typically my workouts are in the six to8 out of 10 intensity I'm not measuring this by any kind of um device and if I get sick I tend to look back and say what was going on before I got sick you know um if I'm getting substantially weaker or I'm feeling uh fatigued I I I take stock of what's going on so I think um some people get the impression that I'm like hyper analytic about all things and um you know I would say Atia is much more into measuring things and I love that about him I'm more of the mindset like if I if I'm feeling good and I feel I'm like I can move my body well not too many aches and pains occas I get a little something of a little D disc bulge or something but and and then I take care of it but in general it's about being able to feel good seated feel good moving be able to have that Readiness Readiness Readiness for me that's the foundation of of health so um other uh things you get a regular eye exam I do have an appointment in Opthalmology Department do that air puff test for glaucoma there are treatments for glaucoma but you need to know if you have it a lot of people don't know if they have it it is the second leading cause of blindness worldwide second only a cataract it's very easy test you can get from optometrist or opthalmologist get that eye test your vision is so precious I mean vision is so precious so I I can't overstate that enough it's uh generally pretty inexpensive as well especially from the optomet rist and the drops work Pablo F asks what do you do with waking up in the middle of the night and can't go back to sleep oh such a good question I have three different tools that I use first of all long exhale breathing just to try and calm myself I also try and relax my face if I do this right now it's going to be funny but relaxing the face tends to relax the jaw and then I'll do a progressive body relaxation I do use the Revy re v r i app and they have a specific hypnosis for falling back asleep hypnosis is self-directed hypnosis David Spiegel who's been a guest on the podcast his voice is terrific for hypnosis even just thinking about his voice makes me want to go under typically with Revy you practice the falling asleep falling back asleep hypnosis it's only eight minutes long you practice that in the daytime and then you can use in the middle of the night if you need to that does require that you have your phone present and by the way if you're going to do that hypnosis you can select whether or not you're going to do the one where you have to interact and speak or not I like the one where you don't interact also if you sleep next to someone it won't wake them up revery is great for this purpose and and you might think hypnosis that's wacky or that's um you know Magic Carpet stuff but it's not this is uh you know hypnosis by the way is one of the few um approved Medical Treatments for various psychological psychiatric conditions we're not talking about stage hypnosis people clucking like chickens we're talking about you learning to self-direct relaxation which is a skill that you can enhance in hypnosis such as with Revy I think Revy now is a a free trial and it's available on Android and Apple and it's a nominal cost when you compare to things like supplements or sleeping pills it's a few dollars each month maybe $78 something like that someone will tell me but if you think about the cost relative to you know some other purchasable it's relatively low the other thing and this is something is completely zero cost and I can't encourage it enough is that you get into a regular practice of nonsleep deep rest nsdr or Yoga Nidra and that you do that during the daytime there's a 10-minute nsdr that I did which is available on YouTube you just put nsdr huberman it's available completely zero cost it will teach you how to self-direct your own relaxation and you can also use in the middle of the night if you wake up many people fall asleep during ndrs that's fine or yoga nras many of which are available on the internet free okay completely free Yoga Nidra is a little bit different than nsdr it is a category of non-sleep deep rest that includes intentions and things of that sort self-directed relaxation but relaxing is a skill now there are a few things that you can do to avoid waking up in the middle of the night one is try and limit the total amount of fluid that you drink in the last couple hours before sleep don't go to bed with a super Full Belly um some people find that if they take theanine which is something that is in the Sleep stack that I recommend and by the way I don't necessarily believe that everyone needs to take supplements in order to sleep I think you should get the behavioral stuff the light the exercise not drinking caffeine too late in the day avoiding alcohol ideally completely but maybe late in the day especially etc etc and if you can't get your sleep right that way then perhaps you start to rely on or enhance your sleep capabilities with supplements but they're certainly not a requirement the sleep supplement theanine which is in the so-call hubun lab sleep stack which includes magnesium 3 and8 and appenine uh and theanine theanine for some people can really create vivid dreams and then they wake up from those dreams they have a hard time falling asleep in that case I would just reduce the dosage of or eliminate the theanine some people like to use anoco 900 milligram anoco because they prefer that and it that works better or uh for them than the Sleep stack or some people even take it in addition to the Sleep stack um as long as dosages are followed there's no reason to think that any of the stuff isn't safe but of course check with your doctor before adding or removing anything from your supplement protocol or any protocol for that matter I say that to protect you not to protect me the other thing that you can do if you wake up in the middle of the night is to not look at the time now that's a little bit difficult if you're going to look at your phone but you know this is something that Folks at the Stanford Sleep Clinic taught me that people who look at the time when they wake up in the middle of the night generally have a harder time falling back asleep so that to the extent that you can refrain from doing that and certainly don't get on your phone and start scrolling social media um try nsdr try the revery app try yoganidra try some long exhale breathing all those protocols by the way include long exhale breathing and if you're taking melatonin before sleep oftentimes you'll fall asleep very readily and then wake up so if you're taking melatonin you might want to reconsider that melatonin does have its place for treatment of jet lag and things of that sort in the acute situations and not taking it too often but in general dosages are too high people take too much of it and too often in my opinion but that's just my opinion and then I would say if you wake up in the middle of the night and you simply cannot fall back asleep just remember that you can survive one night with minimal or no sleep unfortunately we've all had to deal with that if it starts becoming a chronic condition then you may want to talk to a sleep specialist but we've done multiple episodes of the hubman loud podcast the master your sleep perfect your sleep we have a sleep newsletter that you should definitely download it's zero cost again hubin lab.com newsletter go to menu newsletter and you can find that for those of you that subscribed to the premium channel I'm guessing that you're a aware of these um various uh tools but one thing we know from the Sleep Lab at Stanford is that when people are excited about their next day sometimes they wake up and that their sleep actually can be less than normal and they can function well the next day in fact there have been two studies at least that I'm aware of two studies there may be more showing that when people are given a quote unquote poor sleep score their cognitive Performance and Physical performance has diminished even if they slept really long and really well so they've lied to them in these studies conversely if people haven't slept that much and they rece receive a great sleep score they perform really well so these sleep scores while I like them I look at my eight sleep sleep score or whoop sleep score some people use aura rings and things of that sort you don't want them to drive your perception of how available you are for hard work and cognitive function it's why I tend to rely largely on subjective measures unless you were talking about things like apob or cholesterol levels you know subjectively uh guessing what your apob level is is not a good approach right or resting heart rate they're real metrics but you want to be careful about relying too heavily on um Biometrics gleaned from devices even if they're accurate don't put too much weight into them take the average see how you're doing lately if your sleep score is dropping each day by 15 20 points well then pay attention to that or your heart rate's going up or it's going down you know averages averages averages you know and so be a scientist of yourself coach Ruby writes what's the best protocol for strain training without hypertrophy for women great question when I've lifted heavy weights I tend to bulk up fast okay want to embrace more resistance train without the bulk great question so here's the interesting thing about weight training that's kind of cool you will never get larger than the so-called pump that you achieve in a single workout what do I mean by that well a lot of people and women in particular are concerned about getting quote unquote too big too bulky and indeed some women some men react very quickly to weight training they have high fiber density and for whatever reason um could be hor hormones but it probably also has to do with um different types of proteins that are expressed in the muscles and even the connective tissues some people just grow quote unquote faster from weight training but I will tell you this no one's ever looked at a weight or picked up a weight done a set and then hypertrophied so much that it was permanent right the the so-called pump the blood flow that you get into a muscle gives you a little window into what that muscle might look like if you feed it and rest it properly so it can recover in hypertrophy so does that mean that you should avoid the so-called pump the blood flow into the muscle no what do we know from gosh I guess it' be 40 Years of uh physiological data and probably hundreds of years of um just outside the laboratory data that very heavy weights in the range of one to three repetitions generally make people stronger but there isn't much hypertrophy when you get from three to five repetitions you're still in the mostly strength some hypertrophy range when you get out towards six repetitions out to even 30 repetitions provided the sets are going to failure you can't perform another repetition in good form well then you're stimulating hypertrophy now there are exceptions to this there are exceptions if you do for instance a one repetition set with a weight but that weight allows you to do that set over the course of 75 seconds that's a lot of time under tension and you can get hypertrophy in addition to that weight training that involves an accentuation of the negative the Ecentric the lowering portion of each repetition also will stimulate hypertrophy but also strength gains so if you're somebody who wants to strength train and strength training is oh so important not just for muscles but for neural function in the brain and elsewhere in the body then you really don't want to put on any size whatsoever I would encourage you to explore some of the protocols that Dr Andy Galpin and I discussed on the exercise series that we did with Dr Galpin that would be largely training of after a warm-up of course in the 1 to three repetition range and even some training that's done strictly for power moving the weight quickly at loads that are substantially lighter although for some people just because their genetic makeup they are going to react with hypertrophy that kind of training so I would say if you want a weight train which is a great idea and you don't want to put on size but you want to get stronger training that one to three repetition range now that does not necessarily mean one repetition maximums you know eeking out the absolute last what single rep that you can with the most amount of weight maybe you back off on your single repetition maximum you're still just doing one repetition but of course if you want that repetition to be of any value in in inducing strength then you should be getting close to your one repetition Max but um keep in mind also that if you're doing three repetitions heavy weights but you're only resting you know 30 to you know 120 Minutes between sets well then you can get a kind of compounding effect where you can induce hypertrophy so if you react that well um and by the way many people do or there are some excuse me many most people do not some people do to low repetitions then you may have to increase the weight and lower the repetitions even further long rest just make sure that if you're doing that kind of training if you're concerned with overall health and not just powerlifting or being really really strong that you're also doing some cardiovascular training which includes you know walking plenty and the sorts of cardio that we talked about earlier Steve says what are your thoughts on these full body scan MRIs that are becoming quite popular do you think these are beneficial or are they unnecessary well I got one um and I paid for it I didn't get it comped or anything and I must say I learned a lot um fortunately I learned I don't have any tumors at least not of the size that could be detected by that MRI I also learned that I have a disc bulge that explains a lot of times in my life life where I do a certain movement there's one or two movements that I do in the gym we running and a certain stride where that thing goes and confirm that um so I've managed to uh I'm very grateful that uh I only had one white spot on my brain the white spots are considered naturally occurring typically um lesions of the of neurons um everyone has these you're allowed one per decade of life before they start to consider it a potential problem I think I have that right um um there's not a whole lot you can do for those by the way except don't get any more head hits if you're doing a contact sport or construction or something where you can you know but some people still have to continue to work and if that's their work they have to work so yeah I think it was it was informative for me um I watched a Netflix movie in there was pretty cool um the movie wasn't very good but it was cool that you can watch Netflix in there it's pretty easy to do they're not cheap they're a couple thousand doll minimum um it was reassuring to me to not see any tumors on my liver tumors on my kidney knock on wood you know I mean um and to see that I didn't have a lot of intrav visceral fat or anything like that I mean I I doubt I'm the healthiest specimen that rolled has ever rolled through there but it was it was reassuring to me that I wasn't dealing with a bunch of white spots on the brain I wasn't dealing with that sort of thing and you know is it necessary no no it's not also some people don't want to know what's going on under the hood is it unnecessary is what you asked that's a tricky one I mean it really depends on finances and how curious you are I will say this my good friend and former guest on the hubin Lab podcast Dr Eddie changen who's a medical doctor and chair of neurosurgery at University of California San Francisco when I told asked him about it and I told him I got one he said oh yeah we get people coming in all the time patients all the time who've gotten these whole body scans for recreational purposes or because they were curious and they will identify issues that need to be resolved with neurosurgery now that splits my answer in two because that's kind of scary right that could there be could you be walking around with tumors on the brain and not even know it yeah absolutely for a lot of tumors are benign a lot of tumors don't impinge on areas of the brain or body that create problems and never create problems and others create problems and um do you want to know do you want to get that tumor excised there are a lot of non-invasive ways to deal with tumors nowadays um I guess it's a question of whether or not you want to know and when I say want to know I mean obviously everyone would love to know that they have a clean bill of health under the hood but do you are you prepared for what might happen psychologically and medically and what you would have to do in order to remove an issue that maybe not an issue right um it's possible that you have a you know you have a growth or a mass that's benign but you know then you have the anxiety of the period in between So It's Tricky um some tissues like prostate tissues or um different tissues in the uh female reproductive tract can be enlarge but not be problematic but then people might want to make changes that to ensure that the enlargement doesn't continue I'm a big believer in data I like data so while I'm not big on tracking my sleep every night I do track it at night but I don't necessarily put too much weight on any one individual night's sleep score um and by the way if you get a really lousy lousy sleep score chances are you know youve slept poorly if you guys great sleep score chances are you know you slept well um it's the stuff in between that that kind of gets people interested um I don't know I I think for me I I was happy to get the bill of health I did and had I uh discovered something that needed dealing with I guess I'd be grateful that I went in for it um so that's my answer but again they're expensive I hope the cost comes down I hope insurance will cover these eventually Orca La Vista what a great name Orca La Vista awesome um asks would you as a dog lover considering doing an episode on dog wellness and communication yes yes absolutely I love dogs I love dogs so much it's ridiculous I just do I just I I like being around them I like thinking about them I like hanging out with them and they're family members right Costello is a family member and I um I'm eagerly anticipating getting another dog probably when we get back from tour in Australia from Australia um I'm not going to bring back an Australian Shepherd they have like way too much energy for me I like the Mellow dogs I like economy of effort in a dog which is why a bulldog or a Mastiff is probably a good one for me yes yes and yes pet health is key relationships with pets are key don't get a dog that you can't take great care of and Bulldogs are a ton of work and they're very expensive plan on spending at least I'm not kidding $20,000 a year in medical bills on a dog to keep a bulldog to keep them healthy adopt if you can a lot of dogs out there need need be adopted heid M says I need advice I'm 32 I'm working out for 2 three years but my left arm is weaker than my right how do I balance muscle strength between sides different weights or strategy great question well I guess you're assuming it's a lot weaker I mean I am a big believer in doing unilateral movements I can't remember last time I did a barbell curl or or a or a you know the thing they call the Easy Bar tricep extension I almost always do unilateral stuff dumbbell curls I think the real key if you want a weaker arm or limb to get stronger is that mind muscle connection you know it means presumably unless there's some sort of under underlying neurologic thing and I don't want to scare you it's always possible it seems unlikely based on the way you worri the question is that you want to make sure you're gripping the handle the weight really tightly by the way that will increase your strength and performance on a set to grip tightly there's neural reasons for that and that you're really working hard to contract the muscle and also use weights that you can control remember when you lift weights for the sake of getting stronger it's not about lifting weights you're actually using the weight as a tool to stimulate strength and hypertrophy increases so it's a tool and you don't walk around with the weight number on your body you walk around with the muscle development that you achieved and the strength that you achieved with a particular weight and no one cares what that weight is so if you're you know if you can't carry two bags of groceries up the stairs um it doesn't matter if you were able to you know carry 400 lb dumbbells through the gym right I mean that's why I think the Readiness thing is key I think we think so much about the gym as the as the end point but the gym is a place for training for the rest of life in my opinion it also happens to be fun for me but um if your left arm is weaker I would emphasize well you could perhaps do more sets certainly I would do you could do all your left arm sets first then your right arm sets if it's really substantially different you may actually want to stop training the right side as intensely for a period of time and get that left arm up there uh things like that but I like unilateral work I don't do a lot of unilateral work for my legs let me think I do leg curls no that's both legs same time I definitely try and pull with both legs same time leg extension same time uh hack squat same time glute ham same time okay yeah um just keep training it but don't overtrain it if it's really weak because you're giving it 25 sets make sure you're allowing time for it to recover and by the way I don't know um uh how I I don't recall because the question's gone now how old your but you give your body time give your body time I started training when I was 16 give your body time it takes time to train correctly and it takes time to develop a strong mind muscle connection and you don't don't rush don't run out there and start using you know uh don't get cavaliere with Pharmaceuticals or anything else just take your time enjoy your training the best advice I ever got about training um with somebody very accomplished and he said and I really internalized I like learn to and you may delete the learn to learn to enjoy training really hard or just love training hard I love training hard I love it I love it I love it so just learn that like lean into that process and enjoy it and if you and if there's certain parts that are challenging remember you're increasing the size of that medial interior mid singulate cortex last question really I was I was hoping we just keep going maybe I'll do like a 24-hour marathon of this and then we also do it as a as a study in sleep deprivation does anyone want to vote for that I've done that before I used to work 36 hour stretches when I was in graduate school no joke we would do these physiology experiments my producer here is sitting here going like don't do it but it's righta by the end of those experiments we'd be wearing tin foil on our heads and we were doing these experiments but we built a lot of resilience we used to survive on In and Out Burgers and I was like don't eat the bun because the carbs will make you sleepy and then we' we'd argue about it and we' you know we'd start to hallucinate somewhere around the 30 hour mark and my friend Kenzo he's now a professor back at uh University of Maryland so he can he can vouch for that story but gosh that was fun I I don't miss it I was in my 20s uh 30s yeah no 20s late 20s um but if people think it be maybe we do a fundraiser like to ra raise extra money for research and I'll do 24 hours of just answering questions around the clock and just see how you know see at what point I just completely and then I can also teach you guys how to do a proper all nighter because there are tools and the one of the main tools is don't trust your thinking between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. so maybe during that time we just all meditate together all right last question until we do the 24-hour hun lab AMA Marathon do you have plans to produce more content or protocol specifically for children's development and health yes we're going to do a children's or Child Development series that also extends into adolescence and young adulthood I'm also going to be doing episodes on that some amazing guests for that I'm going to do some solos as well are there any current resources you recommend for this topic yeah I like Alan Shore's book it's a little little detailed little technical um s c h o r e Allen Shore I think it's how you spell it let me check let me check at UCLA um little Tech alen Shore yeah a l l an separate word s c h o r e a psychologist in research it really talks about um regulation of the he talks about right brain left brain in a way that actually is accurate there are very few people talk about right brain left brain accurately he does and talks about attachment and emotional regulation and um it's mainly focused on early childhood development there's some beautiful um you know there's some beautiful stuff out there that's that's been comes from the the psychology literature and Neuroscience literature on this but I'm also going to get my friend um Dr Linda wilbri on the podcast she's a professor up at Berkeley studies adolescent development there's just so many great folks out there that we want to bring on to the podcast and we will organize that into um some protocols and things of that sort lot of work to do for us to get it all you know succinct I realize sometimes podcasts are long you know sometimes people ask I often get asked you know what are the plans for 20124 what are you going to do keep improving the content we actually have some shorter form content coming out I don't want to um give away what that is you know some 30 minute episodes that um capture the essence of of the most important protocols in science um and yeah the goal for 2024 and forward is just keep improving the content uh and trying to make it as succinct and digestible for you as possible but also as thorough you know I if I go real short for them then important details will get lost but Child Development is extremely important and remember we're always in development development doesn't stop when we hit hit 25 development is is an arc from birth until death which hopefully will be a long time uh from now for all of you and um there's just a ton to explore there a lot of science psychology protocol so we're going to get into all of it so I was told that's the last question I confess I'm a little bit sad about that I could just keep going um but maybe we'll do this again at some point and I think we should do that 24-hour Marathon as a fundraiser I don't know what you think but I I'll I would do it anyway that's the that's the truth I'd be here anyway um I want to thank everyone for tuning in thanks ever so much for your support of the labs I mentioned earlier if you know somebody who you think might be interested in the the premium channel let them know that they can watch the early parts of those premium channel episodes on YouTube and listen to them on Apple and Spotify without having to to log on for you know not having to pay not everyone has the resources for those of you that devoted resources to the podcast the premium channel just know that it helps support the regular podcast which of course is available costree to everybody it really subsidizes that and it's also subsidizing this uh this research that's taking place in these Laboratories and we're going to expand the research we got that $3 to1 match uh for 20124 so I really enjoyed today that's the truth I love your questions I could do this all day every day uh we have we're going to record an episode today and tomorrow um and I'm basically just going to keep talking till they tell me it's time to stop so when someone in the corner goes like like this then I'll stop if you ever been to one of our Live Events like they're supposed to end 9:30 there you go they're telling me to stop it's time's up thank you everybody I hope you had a great holiday I hope everyone has a very Happy New Year's if you're like me and you're going to be sleep by 10:30 on New Year's um enjoy the good night's sleep and enjoy New Year's Day I'm a big New Year's Day guy get out on New Year's Day and enjoy something and just remember whether or not you're doing behavioral protocols or you're super into the supplements of the red lights the most important thing is those pillars of you know sleep nutrition exercise Stress Management sunlight I guess we're getting up to six and social connection so it's it's a lot to try and do all that all the time don't pressure yourself meanwhile thank you for everything that you do for us and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in [Music] science

========================================

--- Video 160 ---
Video ID: GpgqXCkRO-w
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GpgqXCkRO-w
Title: Rick Rubin: Protocols to Access Creative Energy and Process
Published: 2023-12-25 13:00:12 UTC
Description:
In this episode, my guest is Rick Rubin, world-renowned music producer of numerous award-winning artists, including Johnny Cash, Red Hot Chili Peppers, Beastie Boys, Adele, Eminem, Slayer, and many more. Rick is also the host of the podcast Tetragrammaton and the author of the best-selling book about the creative process entitled “The Creative Act: A Way of Being.” In this Q&A episode, Rick explains the practical aspects of the creative process, such as specific morning and daily routines, the role of movement, and how to source and capture ideas, interpret dreams, and generate work-life balance. He also offers advice for those struggling with creative or motivation blocks. He explains how cultivating relationships with the unknown, uncertainty and life circumstances heightens the creative process. Rick’s insights into accessing your artistic spirit and direction apply to everyone and all realms of art, work, and life.

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Maui Nui Venison: https://mauinuivenison.com/huberman 
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman 
Waking Up: https://wakingup.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman 
Momentous: https://livemomentous.com/huberman 

Rick Rubin
Website: https://tetragrammaton.com
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/tetragrammaton.now
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/@tetragrammaton_now
X: https://twitter.com/RickRubin
Broken Record: https://www.pushkin.fm/podcasts/broken-record

Resources
A History of Rock Music in 500 Songs (podcast): https://500songs.com
Jack Kornfield: https://jackkornfield.com
Meditation on Lovingkindness: https://jackkornfield.com/meditation-on-lovingkindness/
Asi Wind (mentalist): https://www.asiwind.com
Rick Rubin on The Joe Rogan Experience: https://ogjre.com/episode/1881-rick-rubin
Ramones - Loudmouth, 1975 (YouTube Clip): https://youtu.be/ZYmy--9NfYk?feature=shared
Henry Rollins, Joe Strummer, Rick Rubin & Johnny Cash (photo): https://www.gettyimages.com/detail/news-photo/henry-rollins-joe-strummer-rick-rubin-and-johnny-cash-news-photo/1143776545
iPhone red screen: https://ios.gadgethacks.com/how-to/keep-your-night-vision-sharp-with-iphones-hidden-red-screen-0173903
Tetragrammaton episode with Andrew Huberman: https://youtu.be/uXYAEqukWJw
Lift Run Shoot (podcast): https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PL7TKGmLLLg5X0h3QoEAiwGCzEztw4RXFT&feature=shared
TAKE A DEEP BREATH (breathing exercise): https://youtu.be/i5apnLrzaT4?feature=shared&t=728

Books
"The Creative Act: A Way of Being": https://amzn.to/48qgkAA
"Wherever You Go, There You Are: Mindfulness Meditation in Everyday Life": https://amzn.to/3tus7PK

Huberman Lab Episodes Mentioned
Rick Rubin: How to Access Your Creativity (previous Rick Rubin episode): https://go.hubermanlab.com/zBB6x1ycYT
Guest Series | Dr. Paul Conti: How to Understand & Assess Your Mental Health: https://go.hubermanlab.com/N8mwZxHpYT
What Alcohol Does to Your Body, Brain & Health: https://go.hubermanlab.com/WIJpm8w1YT

Timestamps
00:00:00 Rick Rubin
00:02:00 Sponsors: Maui Nui, Eight Sleep & Waking Up
00:06:27 Tool: Coherence Breathing, Heart Rate Variability
00:09:32 Treading Water, Podcasts
00:11:45 Tool: Meditation Practices
00:15:43 Sunlight, Skin, Circadian Rhythm
00:20:00 Headphones, Natural Living, Diet
00:24:31 Artificial Intelligence (AI); Childhood; Magic & Mentalists
00:28:34 Tool: Writer’s Block, Creativity, Diary Entries; Deadlines
00:34:58 Sponsor: AG1
00:35:54 Uncertainty; Creativity & Challenges; Sensitivity & Environment
00:40:43 Wrestling, Storytelling; Johnny Cash
00:48:51 Creative Endeavors & Outcome; Surprise in Oneself; Experimentation
00:56:36 Resistance; Business & Art
01:00:37 Sponsor: InsideTracker
01:01:39 Source of Ideas; Internet & Information
01:08:31 Dreams & Interpretation; Unconscious Mind; Motivations, Art & Outcome
01:14:07 Career Advice, Book Writing, Diary Entries, Expressive Writing
01:19:25 Music Industry; Capturing Ideas; Money & Ingenuity
01:25:21 Audience; Innovative Ideas
01:29:35 Alcohol, Confidence, Psychedelics
01:35:10 Creativity, Chaos & Organization; Shocking Experiences
01:42:13 News & False Stories; Playing, Wonder & Childhood
01:46:58 Ramones; Henry Rollins
01:49:55 Daily Routine; Red Light, Circadian Rhythm & “Cheap Photons”
01:57:46 Creativity, Experience vs. Institutions; Work, Stress & Relationships
02:04:29 Book Recommendations; Ancestry & Creativity
02:07:41 Experiencing Music; Developing Albums
02:12:28 Music Videos; Book Interpretation; Current Projects & Documentaries
02:16:40 Podcasting & Conversation
02:25:41 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify & Apple Reviews, YouTube Feedback, Sponsors,  Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine my guest today is Rick Rubin Rick Rubin is a world-renowned music producer having worked with an enormous number of incredible artists producing for instance Red Hot Chili Peppers Beasty Boys Jay-Z John cash Adele Lady Gaga Tom Petty and of course Slayer this last year Rick also authored his first book which is a truly incredible exploration into the creative process his book is entitled the creative act a way of being Rick has appeared once before on the hubman Lab podcast and during that appearance he offered to answer listeners and viewers questions those questions were put in the comment section on YouTube and we received thousands of them so today Rick answers your questions about the creative process I also took note of the feedback that when Rick previously appeared on the hubman Lab podcast that perhaps I spoke a bit more than the audience would have preferred so today I refrain from speaking too much and try and give as much airtime as possible to Rick in order to directly answer your questions you'll notice that today's discussion gets really into the Practical aspects of the creative process the most frequent questions that I receive for Rick were ones in which people really want to understand what his specific process is each and every day as well as when he's producing music or other forms of Art and of course people want to know what they should do specifically from the time they wake up until the time they go to sleep even whether or not they should take note of their dreams Etc we get into all of that so today's discussion is very different from the one I held with Rick previously and at least to my knowledge from any of the other interviews or discussions that Rick has had public before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is Maui neui venison Maui Nei venison is the most nutrient-dense and delicious red meat available I've spoken before on this podcast and there's General consensus that most people should strive to consume approximately 1 gram of protein per pound of body weight now when one strives to do that it's important to maximize the quality of that protein intake to the calorie ratio because you don't want to consume an excess of calories when trying to get that one gram of protein per pound of body weight Maui venison has an extremely high quality protein to calorie ratio so it makes getting that one gram of protein per pound of body weight extremely easy it's also delicious personally I like the ground venison I also like the Venison staks and then for convenience when I'm on the road I like the jerky the jerky is a very high protein to calorie ratio so it has as much as 10 grams of protein per jerky stick and it has something like only like 55 calories so again making it very easy to get enough protein without consuming excess calories if you would like to try Maui venison you can go to mauii venison docomo to get 20% off your first order again that's mauii venison docomo to get 20% off today's episode is also brought To Us by eight sleep eight sleep makes Smart mattress covers with cooling Heating and sleep tracking capacity I've spoken many times before in this podcast about the fact that sleep is the foundation of mental health physical health and performance now a key component of getting a great night's sleep is that in order to fall and stay deeply asleep your body temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3 degrees and in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized your body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3° one of the best ways to make sure that those temperature changes occur at the appropriate times at the beginning and throughout and at the end of your night when you wake up is to control the temperature of your sleeping environment and that's what eight sleep allows you to do it allows you to program the temperature of your mattress and sleeping environment such that you fall and stay deeply asleep easily and wake up each morning feeling incredibly refreshed and energized I've been sleeping on an eight- Sleep mattress cover for almost 3 years now and it has dramatically improve the quality of my sleep so much so that when I travel and I'm at a hotel or an Airbnb and I don't have access to my eight sleep I very much look forward to getting home because my sleep is always better when I sleep on my eight sleep mattress cover if you'd like to try eight sleep you can go to 8sleep.com huberman to get $150 off their pod three mattress cover eights sleep currently ships in the USA Canada UK select countries in the EU and Australia again that's 8sleep.com huberman today's episode is also brought To Us by waking up waking up is a meditation app that offers hundreds of meditation programs mindfulness training and Yoga Nidra which is sometimes referred to as nsdr I'm a longtime fan of meditation I started meditating when I was back in my teens and I started doing a daily 10 or 20 minute meditation and I kept that up for a number of years but then it became more sporadic and then eventually I stopped and then I'd start again and then I'd stop what I found with the waking up app is that it makes it very easy to take on a meditation practice and to do meditation if not every day very close to every day and that we know based on a lot of research has an out ex positive effect on everything from stress regulation to sleep you come up with better ideas so indeed meditation can make you more creative more focused and on and on and then about 10 years ago I got introduced to Yoga Nidra or nsdr non-sleep deep rest which is a practice of laying completely still while keeping the Mind very active so you're relaxing but keeping your mind active and I use nsdr essentially every single day I'll do it anywhere from 10 to 30 minutes and I find it to be incredibly restorative it really resets my ability to think and to engage in physical activity and with waking up I can select different lengths of meditations different lengths of yoga nedas or ndrs so that I keep up my practice if you'd like to try waking up you can go to waking up.com huberman to try a completely free 30-day trial again that's waking up.com huberman to try a free 30-day trial and now for my discussion about protocols for creativity with Rick Rubin Rick Rubin welcome back thank you sir happy to be here we're going to answer or rather you are going to answer the questions of the listeners of our previous podcast episode before we do that however when we were out in the lobby you mention that you have a breathing exercise a coherence breathing exercise that you thought might be useful for us to do now and perhaps for some of the listeners to join in yeah let's do it and then if you want to talk about it after we can sounds good the reason I started doing this is I have relatively low heart rate variability and you want to have a Higher One M um so I looked at all the things that can raise your heart rate variability and I started doing this breathing technique specifically for heart rate variability then it went up awesome so it's great tested great let's do it together here play it'll say take a deep breath and then when you'll hear the sound of a if you follow me for the first inhale and exhale you'll know what sound means what and you do this eyes closed typically I do it eyes closed okay we'll close our eyes eyes thank you [Applause] [Music] [Music] [Music] that was five minutes I like that feels nice doesn't it yeah I notice I don't spontaneously breathe at that Cadence I breathed quite a bit faster mhm so especially on the exhale mhm so once I got into a rhythm of it yeah the mind just goes pseudo random for me what about for you does your mind tend to go one place I do now I count um so the reason I knew it was 5 minutes is because it's six breaths per minute and I counted five 1 one 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 2 1 so I was occupied with a task how often do you do that at least once and sometimes twice a day I aim for 10 minutes a day but if I get to 20 minutes a day it it's uh noticeable in my heart rate variability results do you do the coherence breathing at a particular times of day or just whenever it occurs to you uh I think it depends on where I am and what else is going on in my life so it it there was I had a window of a very specific thing that I was doing I would do coherent breathing and I would do squats just air squats and um in one location where I didn't have any other equipment and uh and then I found a way like where I was doing treading water which you got to experience with me I would tread water and then after Treading Water I would get out of the pool sit in the Sun and do the coherent breathing great yeah we should probably mention what uh the treading water was about because people will wonder um very briefly I went and visited Rick overseas this summer and we spent a fair amount of the daytime um treading water while listening to podcasts from a speaker on the side of the pool and it was awesome um time together as friends is awesome time in the sun is awesome learning from podcasts and listening and being entertained by podcast is awesome and then treading water is awesome you're much better at treading water than I am I was fatiguing it's just as as I said when we were doing it it's it's um it's like doing stairs if you practice doing stairs it gets easier to do stairs but nobody's good at doing you know marathon runners can't run up the stairs it's a you know it's a particular thing and treading water if you just do it in even in the little bit of time that we were doing it every day by the end of your stay it was easier for you than when you started definitely yeah you acclimate quickly yeah I was able to adapt I was impressed at your endurance and Treading Water early on by the way I've continued the Treading Water practice because I'm fortunate to have a pool in my new place yeah um I listen to your podcast truly wow tetr grammaton love it uh love love love it uh I listened to a few other podcasts and I've started listening to more episodes of the podcasts that you introduced me to which was history of rock music and 500 songs Andrew hickey English podcasts great podcast real indepth information about music yeah yeah that was such a great trip thanks for having me over there thanks for coming it was fun Treading Water it was loved the time with you and your family so I'm going to I'll invite myself again you're always welcome on the topic of meditation uh one of the questions in this list of questions we'll talk about the list itself in a moment um was about this anecdote that you've told me and you've mentioned a few other places is apparently that you've once meditated all the way from was it San Francisco to New York or Los Angeles uh to New York flight it was either LA to New York or New York to LA I can't remember and I may have done it more than once the question specifically was which meditation did you do TM TM was the first meditation I learned Transcendental Meditation learned when I was 14 it's a it's pretty much a default uh setting for me now sometimes it evolve from TM into breathing like I might start by doing breathing before the TM piece starts and I and the breathing may just take the whole time or it may turn from breathing into a gratitude practice or a meta practice which is a four phrases may I be filled with loving kindness may I be well may I be peaceful and at ease may I be happy and you repeat those phrases over and over and it's starts may I and then eventually if you've done it for a year or so you could start saying may we for your for your immediate family and then May and then as you build up the charge for your immediate family in another year or so you can spread it to your community and eventually after maybe five years you can do it for the planet so that's the Meta Meta MTA amazing loving kindness practice and are there any particular links maybe you could pass us later and we could put in the captions maybe one that you've used I learned it from Jack cornfield who's a Buddhist scholar and a a brilliant teacher terrific uh what do you think meditation has allowed you uh afforded you as well as what it's helped you avoid in terms of a daily practice or um maybe in just how doing it once in a while has Wicked out into areas of your life this is probably a long list of things but if you were to pick maybe like the top three where you go yeah when I'm meditating regularly blank happens and blank doesn't happen and when I'm not those things because I've been doing it for such a long time it's so um part and parcel of who I am that without I don't know who I would be without it that said I don't always do it but I don't have at this point I don't have to always do it to be in this Zone where I've been you know for almost you know 45 years it's been a big part of my life so a great deal of the benefits have are in me now when I practice it gets Amplified but um as Maharishi described it every time you meditate is like making a deposit in a bank so it's always there every time you do it it's you're building a base and the goal of the practice is less about the practice it's about the practice is to change the way you are in the world so it's a practice for life do do you know what I'm saying like the the changes that come in the meditation are to help your reactions in the real world in some ways not to trivialize it but it's like physical exercise you know during a good workout your blood pressure is really elevated you're secreting all sorts of in inflammatory cyto kind you know if we were to draw your blood midw workout uh you'd say this person is in trouble yeah but then all these wonderful adaptations occur that allow you to sleep better better mood walk upstairs easily and on and on it's funny about sleeping better this morning I was walking on the beach and um had my headphones on wired headphones and I was listening to a podcast I can't remember what I was listening to but I was listening to a podcast and someone flaged me and interrupted me who I didn't know and I went over to talk to him and he said I heard you talking about Steve Martin on a podcast and uh and he told me a story about Steve Martin that he got to see him in 1979 I would say this person was probably mid mid to late 60s and he was wearing all black he was wearing shoes on the beach uh tennis shoes he was wearing dark sunglasses and a hat and um he said said uh just want to talk about comedy and things that he heard me say on a podcast and we talked about it for a while and then he said something about he loves podcast and he listens to him at night cuz he's got terrible insomnia and he can't sleep and I'm looking at a guy in the sun wearing sunglasses and I said well you know the reason you can't sleep is because you're wearing sunglasses now like what are you talking about I said well the way the the human body works is we react to the sun the sun is what tells us we're awake and then at night when it's dark that what tells us to go to sleep so you're mixing the signals to your body by wearing the sunglasses and he said well well I'm a dermatologist and you know I've been a do he said he was a dermatologist for the last 40 years and my whole practice is about getting people to get out of the Sun and and I I we started talking about it and uh he he was all covered up I was wearing um my my board shorts and nothing else and and I said well I'm in the sun you know hours every day and and he's like aren't you worried about uh cancer and I said no I I feel pretty healthy I feel okay and then he said let me see your back and I turned around and he looked at my back he's like you have Perfect Skin he like they should study you in a in a uh in an Institute I said this is what normal this is what normal healthy skin looks like if you expose it it to the Sun and he said so you're saying everything I've been teaching in my in my uh medical practice for the last 40 years was wrong said yes everything it was funny funny conversation yeah it's interesting I mean we could go down a deep rabbit hole with this but you know listeners of this podcast will know that I'm you know very much a proponent of getting those sunlight signals to the eyes at least once a day in the morning but also in the in the evening this I'll just share with you um now I learned from a a guest whose episode we haven't um aired yet that the what is so special about that morning and evening sunlight are the contrasts between blues and oranges blues and reds blues and pinks that we can't always see if there's cloud cover but they come through and it's the mathematical difference in their presence a subtraction of a lot of blue and then next to it a lot of orange or a lot of blue and then next to it a lot of pink that triggers the body's understanding that this is morning and evening and that night is coming in the evening and that it's time to be awake in the morning and throughout the day in the middle of the day when the sun is out and it's overhead it looks like white light and white light includes the blues and the oranges and the pinks and the Reds but the they subtract to zero because they're all mixed together that's why it looks just blue and white and so while bright light is great throughout the day it's those morning signals now the I think the Dermatology Community is starting to come online with the idea that loow solar angle sunlight early and later in the day sunrise sunrising and sun setting and I say that because people always go oh do you have to see across the Horizon that would be ideal But Rising and setting do not create the kind of skin damage or eye damage that they've been so concerned about and I think the next step for the field of Dermatology is going to be to start communicating with the neuroscientists and the Circadian biologist and and really uh learning that so thanks for bridging that gap on the beach this morning I I do think that's how it starts and then it Wicks out headphones so um I made the choice a few years ago to stop using the Bluetooth headphones based on my personal experience which was I kept getting these cysts behind my ears which I was told were lymph swellings of lymph they would actually drain lymph if they got big enough it was it was really gross and kind of troubling I stopped using them I didn't get them I started using them again I started getting those lymph things and and there was some significant heat effects as well um and and I've interviewed a couple people including a neurosurgeon on the podcast about um the level of emfs that come from them and they were not concerned others I've spoken to are concerned I'm going to try and balance out the conversation over time but my feeling was look if there's any concern whatsoever why would I use them and I so I use the ones with wires yes but use the ones with wires that are even one step further away from um Wi-Fi transmitted there are ones with air tubes that I use depending on what's going on um and those have no electrical um there's no electric near your head it's just an air tube where the sound is traveling this actual sound is traveling in the tube Interiors I definitely sleep better with the phone out of the bedroom some people are now turning off their Wi-Fi at night I think you and I are both really aligned in the sense that we've seen enough things come and go in the health space like disparaging marks about lifting weights like that's just for bodybuilders and it now everybody knows muscle bound you become muscle bound now men and women elderly and young are encouraged to do resistance training uh Yogo used to be cast in this kind of Magic Carpet realm breath work all this stuff has become overtime mainstream but it's taken a very long time and the road has been choppy and sometimes in my opinion really unfair to the to the practices and and their value I mean these are zero cost practices in many cases that can really help people and so when I look at something like sunscreen or or you know Bluetooth headphones or we're talking about some of these things I wish I had a portal into the future where we look back and go like of course of course so what are your thoughts on just kind of um health and wellness as you've observed it in the last 20 30 years I mean you've been in this for a while I mean you paid attention to mindfulness and mind body stuff you know what are your thoughts I I try to live in as natural way as possible possible I try to eat as few processed foods as possible try to eat grass-fed animals um and and I use hardly any products of any kind you know that that aren't just something that grows or lives on the planet there were a couple questions about this I'll ask now um you lost a tremendous amount of weight you look great by the way than you look super fit every time I see you you're in better and better shape um and uh that's that's in that's your perception it's not in fact the case I'll accept it I don't know when I see you each time you I mean you're extremely mobile you you're sleeping well you have a robust life like you know mean all the marks of health and vitality um so I've heard you mention before that you lost a significant amount of weight how much weight and how did you do it uh 135 lbs through a high protein low calorie low carb diet and that went against the convention at the time uh well the person who suggested it was uh uh someone at UCLA so it was a mainstream Doctor Who helped me with my weight loss I had been a vegan at that time which was not mainstream then and it was very unhealthy but I did that for 20 some ODOT years because I believed in the theory of it but it proved not to be um healthy for me do you think that different diets likely work for different people yes so that not everyone necessarily should do what you did no yeah no but I I think most people would probably benefit from healthy red meat I'm saying that only because it's so vilified in our culture yeah I agree and I think the healthy piece is key there to non-factory farmed animals um which fortunately reasonably cost sources that are becoming more available MH um well I'm going to start pulling from the list of questions uh by the way folks there were more than a thousand questions in just the onethird print out that I did um it's an intimidating stack in front of you it's the most notes I've ever put in front of me during a guest uh discussion here on the podcast and we are not going to ask you every question but I've organized them in a in a some sense of a coherent order um did you organize them or did AI organize them I organize them but that's a great opportunity to ask you one of the questions that came up several times which was um what are your thoughts on AI and its ability to um shape how music is made how Visual Arts are made are you one of these like scared of AI or do you Embrace new technology I don't know enough about it yet to to talk about it what I will say is what what I find interesting about art is the point of view of the person making it and I don't know that AI has a point of view of its own so and I don't know how interesting it would be ai's point of view uh but I like people's points of view and what makes an artist a great artist to me is something about their point of view does something with to me childhood the question for Rick Rubin was what activities did you find most enjoyable and easy to get lost in as a child I love this question for you in particular reading was a big part of my life listening to music was a big part of my life playing guitar along with music can't really play but the idea of playing along so it didn't have to actually be good enough to play along CU I didn't have that skill set but I like the experience of doing my best to play along with something I was listening to and um also magic uh learning like shuffling cards in front of a mirror and um coin tricks and uh slide of hand was just interesting to me do you still do magic I don't okay at the time that music took over my life I had to choose between the two because both of them were full-time life Pursuits I went and saw a mentalist in New York this summer with my sister AI wind is his name ASI first name last name wind every time I see a Mentalist and especially when I see aie I've seen him twice it it blows my mind what are your thoughts on mentalists as it's my favorite form of magic it's the most interesting because it it doesn't rely on props it it's it's it's pure um it feels like pure magic M you know if if you have a box and you pull something out of the box there's probably something tricky about the box but when someone can look at you and tell you what you're thinking it's just wild it's really wild so I love that after aie did his his act um when we pseudo returned to reality because it really does change the way you look at things after that for quite a while maybe forever I asked him if he was willing to share maybe just like one nugget of insight into how he does what he does with and of course I wasn't expecting he was going to give away the whole thing and he said um a lot of it has to do with forming and erasing memories in people quickly which sounds very kind of dark and mysterious really interesting yeah that maybe it's possible to to erase memories wow people like like maybe what we thought we saw we really didn't see or here wow so I dig that b description yeah I'm going to bring him out here by the way so we should all get together love I want to get him on the podcast okay a full 10% of the questions for you were around writer blocks sticking points this kind of thing like feeling stuck in the creative process now people didn't specify whether or not they were stuck at the beginning the middle of the end but based on my read of all of these questions I got the that people were feeling like there's something in them that they want access to they want to create but they don't know how to get past that initial stage as opposed to somebody who's like you know 90% done and they just can't finish the last 10% what are your thoughts about these kinds of blocks and how to overcome them um any experience you've had with them yourself and perhaps with uh working with other artists the first thought is to go past the idea of the block and think about what what is what's the cause of the block and the block is usually something like it's either a personal I'm not good enough it's it can be a confidence issue I don't have anything to say or it could be a um thinking about someone else nobody is going to like what I make do do you know what I'm saying so it's either a A self-judgment or fear of outside judgment so if you're making something with a with a freedom of this is something I'm making for myself for now that's all it is it's a diary entry everything I make is a diary entry the beauty of a diary entry is I can write my diary entry and you can't tell me my diary entry wasn't good enough or that's not what I that's not what I experienced of course it's what I experienced it's I'm writing a personal diary for myself no one else can judge it it is my experience of of my life everything we make can be that can be a personal reflection of who we are in that moment of time it doesn't have to be the greatest you could ever do it doesn't have to have any expectation that it's going to change the world it doesn't have to be this has to sell a certain number of copies for any reason it doesn't have any of those things all it is is I'm making this thing I'm making this thing from me and I I want to do it to the best of my ability to where I feel good about it and where it's honest it's honest of where I'm at and if you're living in this world of just being honest to where you're at there's nothing blocking that do you know what I'm saying there are no blocks the blocks are all based on dealing with a different force or a different perception that is made up you know you make up this story and you're living the story I'm in this block because I just can't do it the reason you can't do it is because you're afraid someone else is not going to like it or you're there are no blocks is there's infinite amount of information out there to work with because it doesn't it also doesn't stem from us so we're we're vehicles for this information and it's coming through us all the time so if you don't have an idea when you're sitting at your desk if you go for a walk chance are you'll see something that'll spark something in you as a as a seed to take off from that makes a lot of sense and I had a thought while you were saying that one of the challenges that I have in completing work and getting into a good work Groove is that um especially nowadays because of phones and so easy to communicate with other people it's not that they interrupt me it's that and this happened the other day I set up my new office really nicely I'm living in a very quiet place now it's like almost completely silent unless I'm playing music it's really interesting or the coyotes sometimes come around and start doing their thing at night but completely silent and I realized I was having a hard time getting into a work Groove and I realized that I felt compelled to continue to reach out to people and then I realized as you just provided your answer to the last question that you know there's probably something in me that has a bit of a fear of separation or abandonment from people uh based on my own experience and I feel very well supported by my friends and co-workers these days very very well supported I'm in a kind of Pinch Me place around that and but I realize now that what's happening in my mind is it's not a challenge of getting into the work it's a fear that if I spend a couple hours really in that tight tunnel of creation that there might not be anyone there when I exit it which is a crazy thought that's a crazy thought but that's the anxiety and I only realize that now yeah so thank you great you know I trust that you guys will be there when I when I exit the tunnel and when there's a deadline I have no choice but to jump into that tunnel that that's actually uh what helps deadlines really help me do deadlines help you do you like deadlines uh deadlines don't help me at the beginning of a process they can help at the end once the code been cracked usually when I start something I have no idea what it's going to be um so it's a very open process in the beginning and if there was any sense of uh required timing that would undermine the freedom needed for it to be all that it could be but once the code's cracked and you know what it is and it's all there and you're just you know you're dealing with the fine points then um it can be really helpful to have a deadline as many of you know I've been taking ag1 daily since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast ag1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that's designed to meet all of your foundational nutrition needs now of course I try to get enough servings of vitamins and minerals through whole food sources that include vegetables and fruits every day but often times I simply can't get enough servings but with ag1 I'm sure to get enough vitamins and minerals and the probiotics that I need and it also contains adaptogens to help buffer stress simply put I always feel better when I take ag1 I have more focus and energy and I sleep better and it also happens to taste great for all these reasons whenever I'm asked if you could take Just One supplement what would it be I answer ag1 if you'd like to try ag1 go to drink a1.com huberman to claim a special offer they'll give you five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 again that's drink a1.com huberman a number of questions were sort of comment about what people believe your process is and one of the repeating themes there which I thought was interesting was it seems that Rick Rubin is comfortable with uncertainty and the unknown yes that is true yes and no yes I am comfortable with it because I accept that's the way things are that said when I start a new project I always have anxiety because I'm uncertain of what's going to happen and I want it to be good now I know it won't be done until I feel good about it so in that way there is no um there's no real pressure but I do still feel this anxiety of I wonder what's going to happen today I hope it's good you know when you've worked with musical artists let's say um how important is it to you to know what challenges maybe even what successes but certainly what challenges they happen to be going through at that period in time put differently do you end finding yourself playing therapist and guide and um psychological SL emotional mentor to artists you work with during the creative process or is that separate uh if they're going through something that's interfering with the work anything that gets in the way of the work is something worth discussing our Focus there together is to get the work done sometimes it ends up being more therapeutic to allow that to happen one of the questions that really stood out to me in this vast list of questions um involved a quote from your last discussion on this podcast our last discussion on this podcast um so I'm going to read a little bit of it because it's fairly long but um I found this to be a really important question that we should get into in a bit more depth um somebody I don't know who said If you happen to talk to Rick happen to be talking to you um ask him this for me in his book in the section on self-doubt Rick said quote one of the reasons so many great artists die of overdoses early in their lives is because they use drugs to numb a very painful existence the reason it is painful is the reason they became an artist in the first place their incredible sensitivity if you see tremendous beauty or tremendous pain where other people see little or nothing at all you're confronted with big feelings all the time these emotions can be confusing and overwhel and overwhelming excuse me so this goes on for some pages and then this person says and I think they're speaking for many people when they said this resonated with me personally and I wonder whether or not this is something that maybe you've experienced yourself or that you just noticed about artists in similar situations and what sort of advice do you give the artists you work with in order to embrace those painful tones within them and trans mute them into great work I've definitely felt them myself I'm unusually sensitive in the world I'm wearing red glasses in here for a reason um I live a very um protected monk like life because simulation gets in the way uh of my ability to be where I want to be so I tend to stay away from things um and it it seems to be the case with many artists um a desire for nurturing their internal life and if if the goal is to nurture our internal life it it um it invariably leads to sacrifices did you spend a lot of time alone as a kid I'm asking this question I did yeah I was the only child and I spent most of my time alone when you talk about controlling this amount type of stimulation in your life to protect that inner landscape does that pertain to certain personality types even voice types i' I've found it various times in my life I love people but um there there's certain voices that just grate on me and I can't be around them I just can't be around them they drive me it brings out but it just it's like cacophony inside I just feel like I'm being asked to drink something that tastes awful um does it does that resonate uh I I try to curate the people around me to be people I want to have around me whatever that is whatever that is well you said you protect the inner landscape but certainly you're not averse to high-intensity stimulation last night we went to the aew and by the way thank you for taking me that was such an incredible experience it was really fun it was really fun it reminded me of early punk rock shows where like some of my first punk rock shows where I went and just was like oh my gosh this is exciting and scary and I love it yeah and it felt loving too yes which is also the community of punk rock that I observed and have been blessed to be a part of it's like I it's like there yeah there's aggression but there's also love and then there's romance and then there's also um betrayal and there's all the elements but there's still a sense of like everyone wants to be here and there's a sense of goodness behind at all even though some of it was bloody and violent yes so for you what what does wrestling allow you to feel in those high intensity environments it completely relaxes me because there are no Stakes you know nobody everyone's working together in the show to protect each other no one's trying to hurt anybody regardless of what the story line is it's like a ballet where there's a fight in the ballet there's no um there's no actual aggression of people towards each other it's just the opposite but you get to experience this wildly Dynamic exciting surreal theater piece uh where people are doing these uh gymnastic and acrobatic things that are truly death defying um and it's fun and the the storylines absorb you in a way where you know you never know what's true and what's not Mo you know we know wrestling's fake we're told wrestling's fake but there's something um legitimate about it that seems to me more legitimate than anything else the most legitimate because it's the closest to what the world's actually like people don't always tell you what they really think and when someone tells you a story it might not really be the true story they may even think they may be they may think they're telling you the real story and that might not be the real story we don't know we know so little you know we we we experience something and then we make up a story to understand it ourselves and then forever more when we tell that story it was our version of a of an experience but we don't know that's what happened that was our take on it um wrestling is like that's what the real world is like because we when you watch wrestling you never know what's true that's what if you watch the news like you watch wrestling and you never know what's true it's more it would be more accurate you you'd have a better sense of the world if you took it all in like it was pro wrestling I think we're in a place in human history where people are starting to feel that way about the media it's also why wrestling so popular you know it's it's uh more popular than it's ever been yeah that's interesting things like UFC kind of gladiator like octagon fights and wrestling are increasing in popularity despite the fact that supposedly we're evolving so I think it reflects something both primitive and evolved about the human brain yes right primitive in the sense that yeah there's some violence it's physical that's down in the hypothalamus as we'd say no it scratches that itch MH but they're actually protecting each other you know it scratches that itch of seeing the Gladiators but it's like watching a movie you know it's not they're not really it's they're not really hurting each other they get hurt but only because the things they're doing are so crazy I think in order to be able to thoroughly enjoy wrestling one has to be able to give up narrative distancing just a little bit right narrative distancing is this sense that this is a story it's a movie it's not real but there were moments like yesterday the the jump off the top rope onto the guy who SPL out on the ladder the ladder breaks this was right in front of us it couldn't have felt good no he walked away he seemed fine yeah uh is but that and then um there was a match between two women where a woman put a metal plate into her uh into the bottoms of her suit and then ran in then jumped onto the other woman and you know hit her with the metal plate and then the metal plate kind of slipped out and she was walking around and everyone knew she had cheated cuz you're not supposed to use the metal plate but so it was sort of exciting cuz she had done it exciting cuz she had gotten away with it and at the same time exciting and upsetting that the referee saw it but then didn't call it this is like Twitter X this is like Instagram this is like politics this is like this is real life right like seeing people get away with things is so frustrating if you feel they shouldn't have yeah that's all part of it it's like a it's a very uh accurate representation of the world love it I'm I'm it's it's weird because I never would have thought I'd be hooked I'm hooked it's like archery and professional wrestling now it's like I'm going to be busy guy in 24 I'm going to come back to this very practical question and ask a different question first there are a few comments in here that are just Priceless by the way someone wanted to point out that you're a Pisces and so is Einstein a couple of historical questions I know you're not big on answering historical questions um necessarily maybe you are but I can't help every time I see you asking a question about the Ramones or asking a question about Joe Strummer but I I like this question first of all it starts off I love Rick Rubin he's so fascinating there's so many questions that start that way on the podast that you did with Joe Rogan uh you talked about your experience with Johnny Cash and seeing him in a new light after doing interviews for a book about Johnny or something like that um the question this person asked was from your present view what was the most impactful moment or moments from being with him and working with him or simply do you recall a moment working with Johnny Cash that you particularly enjoyed uh I enjoyed anytime I got to spend time with him he was a really Soulful serious shy quiet man incredibly knowledgeable he knew a great deal about history and had so much about music he knew every song he didn't he may not have known modern songs but he knew the history of Music um really well and there was just a a humble honesty about him that came through I think that the strength of him as an artist was when he said words even if he didn't write the words if he told a story in words you believe that story so he had a a credible gravitas and um he was great because of who he was it wasn't his ability as a singer it wasn't his ability as a songwriter although he was a great great songwriter and he was a great singer but that's not why he was Johnny Cash He was Johnny Cash because of the human being underneath and anything that that guy would have done we would be interested in because that's how much of a beam of light he was on the planet it just happened to be music just happened to be music I love that one question that came up a lot and I I think I can understand why would is how does one convince themselves that what they're doing and working on is worth it and I think here we have to Define worth it um and we can Define that a number of ways but I think this is a feeling that I hear people Express a lot like how do I know if I'm on the right path and I just want to remind your earlier answer that you're pretty comfortable with uncertainty yeah this and the unknown and I think that's a rare trait the question of worth it is reliant on an outcome we don't make these things for an outcome it's a it's it's not the mindset to make something great the outcome happens you're making the best thing you can make it's a it's a devotional practice whatever happens after that happens and that part that happens after it is completely out of your control putting any energy into that part that's out of your control it's a waste of time all it is all it does is undermine your work your work is to make the best thing you can so any thought you have about outcome undermines the whole thing let that one sink in I think that's so important for people to hear and I'll say it's okay to think about outcome after you finished the thing you're making once you've made it then you can say hm what can I do to turn people on to this but in the making of it it's premature which brings my mind back to that diary entry like approach because when you do a diary entry if you lie to yourself you're going to get a lot less out of it it's it's a ridiculous idea lying in your diary entries it is well it's so interesting because when you learn how to do really good science and I was fortunate to work with someone who was truly committed to the truth and accuracy she used to just say Whenever there was a scandal published like someone fabricated data she was like this is so crazy like like why would you get into science you'd be if you want to make stose you better off going into something else so clearly they weren't those people who make up data were not in science for discovery of Truth as best we can understand it they were into it for something else but it's the same way you do you formulate a question then a hypothesis and then you just go see what is and what isn't MH and then afterwards you decide well is this a paper that's sent to a top Journal or a mediocre Journal but you can't control the outcome so it's very similar exactly the same and and it you'll see it in so many different aspects of Life Beyond art it's it's I think one of the things that was interesting that came up in writing the book is it started being about art and I came to realize as I was putting the ideas together that it seems like regardless of what you do in life if you follow these principles your life will probably improve you'll probably be a better husband or a better father or a better whatever it is it's um it seems like the the art is an outgrowth of it's why the subtitle is a way of being it's like you create yourself in a way in the world where the things that you make are tapped into something deep but that comes from you being tapped into something deep that's how it works so tapping into self grounding in self not thinking about outcome diary entry like approach to creating stuff seems to be the and I I think one thing I'll I'll say to that because I say tapping into self it doesn't come from the self but you have to tap into yourself because you're the vessel to allow it to come out everything in the vessel is coming from somewhere else it's not it's not your creation you're the um it's like you're the sculptor or the you're the data an analyst where you're taking these things from different places that you've noticed some things that you've noticed some things that you don't know that you've noticed but you did you know that's how we learn you know we take in a lot of information that we don't even know where taking in but the way we can take these data points that are inside of us that came from outside of us and create a constellation that's what that's what the artist job is but also that's what we all do all the time and to get better at it it's getting more in tune with yourself and opening yourself to things outside of um I'll say if you have a narrow belief system you'll have less information to to work with less data points so being openminded and um allowing surprise to be surprised holding all of your beliefs very Loosely it's interesting because it the way you describe this and from knowing you as well it it seems that this whole process is best served by having really good boundaries like not getting um foggy about what's about you and what's about somebody else or about what other people want or the world wants but also having really good antenna and being able to see what's happening in the world you can't be cloistered and and like this no um but part of the creative process kind of feels and looks like you're you're in you're in a tunnel but then you you have to bring in from the outside I mean that um so it seems like making these two separate compartments that you Bridge um seems important and healthy I mean here as you mentioned it's a way of being it's not just about creating things that's also a healthy way to be in the world because if you're constantly getting pulled around by everything emotionally and things are upsetting you that's not good but if you're just cut off from everything that's not good either do you cultivate that way of being through these practices um or do you think you've been there's something about the way you're wired that you it started off that way it feels natural to me it feels natural to me and I'll tell you when I was younger I thought I would live in New York City my whole life and there was a time when I felt like having that energy and noise around me felt good now I feel best in the jungle or the forest I didn't decide that I didn't decide what feels good you know it it just happened so you're clearly willing to update and adapt change your nutrition change your city change the way you feel information update love it you're a scientist after well I don't know anything again we start with I know nothing we all know nothing so if something sounds interesting worth trying I'll try it see does it work does it not work you know I thought at one point in time I thought veganism was a good idea I was excited about it and I did it for a long time I didn't get the results I was hoping for I didn't have better health I had much worse health I had you know a tremendous amount of weight gain and um I was very ill through that diet but I didn't my intentions were good how do you approach resistance especially resistance in other artists you work with you know presumably people hire you they they want to work with you they they do want to work with you but I think what the person is asking here is if somebody you're working with is stuck like they're stuck do do you ask them to think do you ask them to feel do you ask them to take a day off do you uh do a Dennis Rodman on them and send them to Vegas to party for a couple of days because that's what worked for Dennis do you leave them alone let them come to you I think people are very curious about what those sorts of interactions are like I think it's always a case-by case situation it really depends on the artist it depends on the situation and um and usually by the time that we're working together any resistance they had in the past has already been overcome usually we I'm together with someone who where we make a team with the idea of making the best thing we possibly can and we'll both do anything we can for that thing to be the best it can be we're past the resistance I noce you remain friends with a lot of the people you've worked with which is a great Testament to you and your work and who you are I just want to mention that that's not always the case folks with uh other producer artist relationships so it's worth pointing out a practical question but I think one that um is is worth asking is uh do you handle the finances around your work with artists do you have someone else do like negotiations and all of that kind of stuff I honestly have no idea how it works I have no clue it see everything seems to get done but I have no idea in the inner workings of any of it I try to I try to stay out of as much um if it's not about making the beautiful thing in the moment I don't really want to think about it too much I don't want to be involved in that aspect it was interesting when I was visiting you this summer we had a really delightful dinner conversation with one of your other guests and at one point probably due to me frankly the conversation veered a bit into the business realm and I'll never forget you said in a very polite way that didn't feel dismissive at all you said let's talk about art instead right like enough about business let's talk about art instead and and in that moment I don't remember that well I gleaned a lot of gems from that visit um I wasn't there to study you I was there to hang out with you but I gleaned so many gems treading water in the pool some of the other practices we'll talk about but I remember that and I think about that in myself a lot in the morning you know the emails and things coming in and then I think my purpose in life at this point in my life is to collect organize and disseminate health and science information yes so that for me is Art in this sense and anything else feels kind of someone else can do that right someone else can do you have a particular gift and that you can take complicated scientific ideas and explain them in a way that all of us who are not scientists or not um Medical students can understand and it's really helpful and you do it in a kind and loving way where we get the sense that you care that we understand you explain it in a way that there's a a a care in it that really speaks to us so thank you for thank you for teaching us thank you and thanks for the words that means a lot to me that is indeed what it is for me I want people to know the information because I think it's so cool and important and they need the information and it's not about me it's like like they have to know and you did it this morning for this guy on the beach so I he'll he'll see the light pun intended I'd like to take a quick break and thank our sponsor insid tracker insid tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals now I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term Health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test a major problem with a lot of blood tests out there however is that you get information back about metabolic factors lipids and hormones and so forth but you don't know what to do with that information with inside tracker they make it very easy because they have a personalized platform that allows you to see the levels of all those things metabolic factors lipids hormones Etc but it gives you specific directives that you can follow that relate to nutrition behavioral modifications supplements Etc that can help you bring those numbers into the ranges that are optimal for you if you'd like to try insid tracker you can go to insid tracker.com huberman to get 20% off any of insid tracker's plans again that's insidetracker docomo do you prefer the WWE or the aw Rick I love them both I love pro wrestling pro wrestling is great how often do you abandon an idea or project like is there a is there a pile of journals with crossed out ideas somewhat place in Rick rubin's basement I would say there there are many ideas that have not yet come to fruition but I wouldn't say I've abandon any they it seems like the ideas have a time when they want to come to fruition and regardless of what I think I don't get to determine the calendar the ideas come I can get excited about it I can work on it and then hit a wall nothing else and nothing it just impenetrable and then there'll be another project that just sailing along easily and the universe is working to help support that idea so I tend to work where there's several balls in the air at once and I don't fight against [Music] um if the universe is not helping a project I'm wary to fight with the universe how many projects are you working on right now or typically I it's impossible for me to even say there are so many there's so many ideas and some of them are in idea phase and some of them are in mid you know mid-ming stage and some of them are in the final you know final detail stage there's always something happening I'm always thinking about a lot of stuff and some of it is stuff that I get to share with the world but some of it might be you know remodeling a space or uh I'm always thinking about some creative uh puzzle I have to imagine that for you when the internet came to be that it must have been really exciting because like me you love foraging for information I used to go to the library and Xerox copy papers and I loved looking through the stacks but frankly it was physically exhausting and timec consuming and financially it was hard for me at the time and then you'd always get those copies where like the book crease you know obscured uh the the the text closer to the to the spine of the book and you know I love PubMed I mean like the world's at my fingertips the world of researches at my fingertips my goodness uh how do you feel about smartphones and the internet I mean to you does it feel like a like a giant gift for your creative process or is it an inhibitor it's it's both you know I love that all the information is at our fingertips and sometimes having so much information is um it's hard to sort I'll tell you a quick a quick story which was when the music streaming Revolution happened I was really excited the idea that all of music is in my pocket now and I can listen to any any song any album from any point in my life where I get to hear about something and it's all accessible right now in this moment and I was thinking at that time I'm just going to DJ D all I'm going to do is DJ and I'm going to listen to anything I can think of that I'm excited about haven't heard the Talking Heads in a while let's listen to Talking Heads just how great that that freedom is to have everything at your fingertips and what I came to learn very quickly is I don't want to DJ all day I love that I have the ability to DJ all day I love that when there's something I want to hear I can find it but I don't want to have to do the work of picking everything I'm going to listen to I like being programmed to and I like the discovery of somebody else playing something that I wasn't expecting and getting to enjoy that so now I do more listening to either somebody's curated playlists or uh online radio stations and I do less picking music to listen to but I never would have known that before because I always thought well if I could listen anything I want I want to listen what I want to Listen to I didn't know that I didn't want to have to pick it I love the rare live versions and um bsides and whatever Zs sides that one can find on YouTube like the other day you sent me just at random a a clip from I think it was a Japanese television show with the Ramones opening up um and Johnny opens up with you're loud mouth baby you better shut up and then they they dive into loud yeah and I it's the song I could have heard anywhere else but it was the fact that it was shot from above that it was black and white and that he adds this little riff at the beginning you're a loud mouth baby you better shut up and then just dives into it that made it for me as a huge Ramon fan I was like yeah like you know I think I did that in my kitchen yeah like I was so hyped because when you go and just listen to a song that's recorded as part of an album you're not going to get those additional pieces back in the day and still now if you went to a live show you might see that and hear that and never forget that but in that sense to me YouTube and and the internet is like wow like it's this AR Archive of gems that I I would potentially have been there maybe it was 79 would have been four years old yeah so you know um anyway thanks for sending me that clip loved it because you know how much I love the Ramones but um things like that I just think God the Internet is just amazing and so spacular yeah and the amount of lectures you could find on YouTube are unbelievable the the greatest thinkers in the world I want I don't want to say are on YouTube because they probably didn't post on YouTube but their material is on YouTube and it's unbelievable you know things from old films from the 50s and 60s it's all on YouTube yeah I've been listening to Bible interpretation on YouTube wow and there's just it's interesting to hear different interpretations from different perspectives I would have never found these people most of them are links yeah they're so good I'm I'm trying to work through the Old Testament start to finish now as a as a learning and a practice and wow okay so the question was are smartphones the chains that bind us and prevent our creativity um but I think you answered that it's both a um a rocket ship to creativity and a and a and chains to the ground yeah and it's like all of the tools it's like the tools don't make or break your art it's just it's another tool you can use it or misuse it someone wanted to know and I would like to know whether or not you have any recurring dreams and what are your thoughts on dreams and dreaming in general do you write down your dreams do you spend time about them G I've gone through phases of my life where I've written down dreams I'm not doing it right now um I think we can learn a lot from from writing our dreams I tend not to analyze them in the moment but I've noticed when I've kept a dream journal and looked at it years later these surreal things that made no sense were all saying the same thing and they were all very clear based on my life experience at that time so it gives us Clues as to um what's actually going on the way our subconscious is experiencing Our Lives it's giving us a I don't know if I would call them pointers um Reflections would maybe be a better word our mutual friend Paul kti um believes that the unconscious or subconscious is U both used interchangeably is the supercomputer of the human brain that the misconception is that the forbrain which is involved in planning and context and anticipation of outcomes Etc people think that's the supercomputer but that the supercomputer is the unconscious that's Paul's belief he's stated that very clearly on this podcast and elsewhere and he believes that in dreams the unconscious mind is controlling more of the dialogue which makes a lot of sense yeah but also that the unconscious mind is constantly trying to teach us things in the way that we learn best so like my dreams for instance are all analogies because that's pretty much if people listen to me talk on the podcast I often will use analogy um and I'm very visual so it will present things to me in visual symbols so Paul said in in terms of dream interpretation that we would all be wise to think about how we learn best and our unconscious mind is trying to toss us things in dreams to um explain things in the way that we learn it makes sense and I would say also unconscious and our Instinct the way we Act instinctually is a reflection of our unconscious and as artists that's a tapping into that the Instinct and the unconscious is where the great ideas are and then things that come from our um intellectual selves are are much less they have much less of a charge they're much smaller ideas yeah I think uh the the conscious mind and the intellectual mind as you you're calling it are bound to outcome in a big way I'm going to inject a question of my own um I'm fascinated by the way you've discussed people's real underlying motivations and how that shapes their creative process but also their career um if you would be willing to talk a little bit about the story of Andrew Dice Clay that's the story that to me captures it best um Andrew Dice Clay uh was a uh a comedian who told really offensive jokes and his audience loved him for it but the people who weren't his audience didn't really understand it and they vilified him and he became a comedian because he wanted people to love him he didn't become a comedian to hurt anybody he wanted to entertain people and while he was playing to you know sold out Madison Square Gardens full of people newspapers would write terrible things about him and it really got to him and he decided to change his artistic output to try to make the people who didn't like him like him and when he did that it undermined his whole gift and it just it seemed like things fell apart I think he's in a better place now I haven't I haven't seen him in a while but I think he's in a better place now and he's back to uh caring less about the reaction and in turn getting a better reaction um because he's being pure in what he thinks is funny I liked him very much in fact I thought he did a spectacular job as playing um the female artist's father in A Star is Born had Le Gaga and um Brad Cooper he's a really good actor he's a great actor yeah well I really like the story about him because it encapsulates so much that if people can think about why they do what they do they're going to avoid pitfalls um potentially um but how much time do you think people should spend introspecting about what makes them tick and why they want to entertain or make jokes or um I don't think it's a one- siiz fit I don't know that I could answer that question is it true that ad Rock encourage you give LL Cool J a chance yes that is true ad Rock heard the demo tape and insisted that I listen to it love that this is a kind of generic question but I think it's good to put these in every once in a while um what is your advice to a starting comedian you know these are the the sort of like I I always think of these like uh you know sophomore in high school kind of question but that doesn't necessarily mean they're bad in some sense that's what makes it such a great question like what would be your advice spe to a starting comedian be true to yourself and not to listen to anyone there you go um it would be a great book except it'd be a very short book which would also make it a very great book um well it could be a blank book could be aank you can just put all the things that you want to put in it oh man I'm working on a book now and I'll tell you it's hard by the way I asked Rick for advice about bookwriting um because I'm been trying to write this book for a while and he gave me this the following advice so I'm injecting my own question he said the sooner you can get to a complete draft that you're happy with or happyish with the better the process will go so I'm working on getting that complete draft yeah I would say don't Focus too much on any of the individual details until you have the whole thing down and then you can focus on all making everything better that you want to make better don't get bogged down in that at the expense of getting through the project your advice has really been helping me by the way great I'm doing it like that diary entries great and I've kept a diary for many years so that's somewhat natural tell me a little bit about your diary entries how long how long is a diary entry sure yeah um a diary entry is anywhere from like 1 to eight handwritten pages single line spacing going back and forth between I usually start in all capitals and then switch over to cursive as I speed up uh I've been doing that since gosh since high school I've got a drawer filled with them dated and everything and um it's usually a process of just trying to get something out of my system that I feel is is like clogging me some frustration with the outside world but sometimes like this morning I journaled uh in the room before you showed up and I just was like I think I was riding high off wrestling last night I was marveling at how similar the great experiences of my life are now as they work to every other stage of my life in the sense that they give me this feeling of like okay like there are these gems and I'm of people you and others and experiences and I'm finding them like I'm experiencing them and reminding myself that there there are long periods in between those moments where things feel kind of like not empty certainly not empty but but kind of frustrating in the sense of like I'm busy and I'm dealing with a bunch of things and things don't feel smooth and um but I've been through enough of these cycles that I just am really learning to enjoy the cycles and that was it and uh I and I think the last line in my entry was something like you know and you know and I can't wait for more or something so this morning is just a very positive entry but sometimes you know I mean they definitely some tear stained entries and there definitely some entries where I'm just so pissed I can barely get the writing out but it's it's a process of like getting that stuff out so then I can lean into the the day do you ever go back and look at them I did the other day because I recorded an episode on a very particular type of journaling that's supported by over 200 peer-reviewed studies which is called expressive writing I can tell you about it it's a process that was developed by James pennebaker who is a professor at University of Texas Austin and he had his students write as part of an experiment for 15 minutes a day for just four days either consecu Ive days or a week apart but about the same thing and the thing that they're supposed to write about is the most challenging upsetting or even traumatizing experience of their life and it shows that the data from over 200 studies show incredible positive shifts in Psychology physiology immune system function and ability to combat infections I was so struck by the data from this work that I decided to dedicate a whole podcast episode to it it'll probably be out by time um this episode but um I haven't done that one yet I'm going to do it it's a little bit of a higher bar entry cuz it's like okay I'm going to I hear that the first day especially is pretty upsetting because you're purposely picking something really hard but um yeah but most of the journaling I do is just kind of diary like here's what happened here's what's going on and my biggest fear is that somebody would find them but in preparation for that episode about penne Baker I went and looked at my journals and was like what do I write about and I realized they're pretty autobiographical um sometimes about troubling things but never before had I written four times in a row about the exact same thing interesting yeah yeah pennebaker I think deserves a Nobel Prize if you look at the data on this compared to and I'm not disparaging prescription drugs per say but like ssris for depression it's like at least as good a treatment it's like zero cost stuff but it you know and on and on you don't want to be careful I'll start giving the podcast again now there were a number of questions about quote unquote entertainment and music industry none of which unfortunately were particularly complimentary of quote the industry and I think this is something that comes up a lot because people often focus on the marketing the personalities that may or may not be so pleasant at times I'm sure there are a ton of pleasant Personalities in the industry too but the question is this how do you deal with the and these are their words Soul crushing anti- creative aspects of the entertainment industry and hold on to that sense of creativity and love for the work I'm just focused on the work I don't think of myself as part of the um the entertainment industrial complex I just make the things I make and then there are other people who are good at figuring out how to sell them or get them into stores or get them to services do you have a process of capturing ideas like do you write them down um and the reason this question came up so many times I think is that a lot of people feel like they get great ideas right upon waking or while driving or in the shower random times and they were wondering whether or not you have any way of collecting and curating your ideas prior to embarking on quote unquote a project uh I I write them I make notes in my phone I do it all the time I don't have a great way of doing it and sometimes I'll make a note and then come back to it later and have no idea what it means do you make those notes uh by writing or by uh like voice memo writing that said voice memo might be a something worth trying I've never tried that how do you view money in relationship to your work meaning how do you place it in the constellation of things related to a project you mentioned earlier you let other people do the negotiations but money is just another form of energy um H how do you place it in the in the Contour of what you do I I don't I try not to think of it at all and I because I come from punk rock background which was like a do-it-yourself background it was always more about the idea and the execution of the idea with whatever you could use to do it so if I didn't have uh enough to go to a Prof professional recording studio then I would find a friend who had a home recording studio and record or whatever it was or borrowing a drum machine when I before I had a drum machine I would always find ways to make the things I wanted to make and um I I can't remember a time where a financial boundary got in the way of making something and I see it happening a lot around me and it um I think some people look at it as the money is what allows it to happen and I think I I just see it as the idea is what allows it to happen and then the Ingenuity is figuring out how to do it with you know by any means necessary just got to make it whatever the that version is it may not be the dream version but whatever version you can execute is the one for you to make I can attest to the fact that I launched my podcast in my closet in Tanga Canyon yeah which felt totally natural cuz I also come from the skate boarding punk rock thing where like wouldn't ever occur to me to like get a professional studio built like we're in now we had this one built for us but at the time like of course you use a closet because you just need a black backdrop and you know I think starting from there makes so much sense and you also realize in the minimalist approach you know anything added is just something added so you don't really know what you need if you start with a lot of stuff around you yeah it's it can just be a distraction I'm friends with Darren aronowski who's a great director and his first movie was called pie and he made it for practically no money and it was really well- loved and then the next movie he made was also wildly successful and he made it for very little money and then he made this huge hundred million movie and it wasn't it turned out not to be a success that movie and it was a case of where having more money didn't help him tell a story it's just one particular case um and it's no rues to follow uh but there is something about making the version that you can make with the means that you have that adds something real to the project that may be better than the one that has a lot of money thrown at it I'm laying that sink in around a lot of online tutorials for science have a lot of visuals but we knew we wanted to do YouTube but also just pure audio and it there's nothing more frustrating than somebody talking about something or somebody that you can't see CU you're just listening to it um and the visuals were really expensive to do right and in the end I think if PE I firmly believe in the classroom as well as via podcasting if people can hear something clearly enough and create an image in their own mind of how they would visualize it then it's in there for good whereas just having people look at a slide with with a bunch of beautiful illustrations on it that does nothing for retention of material um so I think the minimalist approach I think sometimes is really the best one maybe it's always the best one because it forces the better solution like the in any case I do realize I editorialized there folks I entered the answering portion of the not just the question asking portion have you ever felt that something was too obscure for Main stream audience appeal to the point where you did not release it never tell tell us more if I like something someone else maybe they'll like it I don't know how can I judge how can I judge every I've been told with every new thing that I've done it's a terrible idea and it won't work every single time really every single time Ghetto Boys LL Cool J beasty boy Slayer Adele every one of them Eminem every one of every time when I went from producing rap records to producing Slayer you can't do that you're you're a rap producer it's going to be terrible don't do it or then Johnny Cash you can't do that you're a metal rap producer you can't do that it's going to be terrible don't do it every single time still to this day still to this day I was so excited when you launch tetr Graton and it's going so well I listen to every episode I love the interviews I've been fortunate to be on there twice I think the second one is still hasn't been released yet but I mentioned tetr grammaton because it just feels so you like the ad reads which I talked about it during my intro but the ad reads are amazing like I listen to the ad reads over and over again because they're so clever and they I don't know they put me in a state I feel like I'm watching I'm like I'm transported to as if I was like born in the 1940s I'm listening to television from for the first time mhm there's there's something there like there's really something there it it's it came out of solving a problem the problem was uh when I decided to do the podcast I had even recorded the first several episodes um a friend of mine said well you're going to have to uh if you want to have uh ads on the show to support being able to do the show then you're going to have to read the ads and I said I don't really feel comfortable reading ads I don't think that's something I can do well I said I'm cool with the idea of only advertising products I believe in or that I use cuz that's if I get to essentially promote something I'll do that with things that I use but I don't feel comfortable reading it um and he's like well you have to it's going to be expected of you and it was just an opportunity it was like uh okay I understand it's expected of me what can I do that's true to me that adds something you know instead of it being less than how can I make it more than and it was just solving this problem of needing a way to have an advertisement that I didn't feel bad about and then got inspired and had this idea and started making them and now they're my favorite thing in the podcast when it when it in many podcasts honestly when the ads come up I forward through them when as a listener on Tetra gramon when it when it commercial comes on I always listen to them it's so it's like a it's a highlight and they make me smile which is again and again I didn't set out to do that I I just was trying to solve a creative problem so sometimes the um the innovative ideas don't come when you're looking for an Innovative idea it's just there's this slot to fill this is the way it's normally done I'm not comfortable doing it the normal way how will can we solve this problem and sometimes it doesn't just solve the problem but it becomes an actual feature yeah there's something about that like solution seeking that is part of or at least is aligned with the creative process right uh yeah the ads are are extraordinary we were listening to them in Italy I'm like play that one again I love the way the guy says the word he say or something like but in but I can't do the accent folks don't don't take I just said as as evidence of what he like Australian accent that guy and the Chimes in the background is so good you don't drink alcohol correct correct have you ever had a sip of alcohol uh I had I drank alcohol once as part of a class experiment and had to mix all these drinks and taste them and um it was a terrible experience but it was a it was a requirement in the class I was taking wow school was different back then yeah or that school was different yeah I think school was different we used to prick our fingers and do our own blood tests and science class I never did it cuz I was always needle phobic but that was definitely something that was asked of us to do yeah you could never get away with that now yeah in a high school classroom the reason I ask about alcohols first of all I'm not the anti-alcohol Crusader even though I did an episode about alcohol which discouraged many people from drinking more it but I think for a lot of people the idea of smoking cannabis drinking alcohol for them in their mind is synonymous with the creative process especially music um for a lot of reasons that people can imagine I think it's remarkable and impressive and worth spending a few moments with you sharing with us you know how is it that you were around all of that you're clearly part of the part of the crew uh meaning you're part of the the creative process presumably people offered you alcohol drugs Etc but something in you seems like resistant to any kind of peer pressure and and as an adult that impressive but to think like you know like when I was 15 16 sure you know I sort of regret it but yeah I drank I I had my experiences and then eventually stopped that but most people people are not good at like not drinking if they don't want to drink ever or just once from a high school class what what was the internal narrative in your mind um when that stuff was around and what allowed you to just say no I'm going to I belong here but I'm not going to do that it just was never interesting to me and I I think maybe it had to do with being an only child I i' never being an only child I think made me less resistant to peer pressure because I felt more confident in who I was whatever that was um just from being with my being with myself and not with other siblings I'm guessing I don't know if that's right but that's my first my first inclination as to guess that would be the case also I've always known what I like and known what I don't like and know there are things I want to try there are things I don't want to try and I feel very good about not doing something I don't want to do I feel great about it have you ever been curious about psychedelics given that I'm very curious I've never done it but I'm very curious and I've been curious for a long time there may be a time when I experiment yeah there are two psychedelics in particular that I find really interesting one is U macro Doocy which I've done as part of a clinical trial um and my understanding is it reveals in a very intense and experiential way some component of the unconscious mind mind and it allows for plasticity and rewiring of the brain that's permanent if you come to some understanding through the so-called integration it's not without its risks the other one that's really interesting that I've been hearing more about and I have not tried um and it carries some dangers as ibigan which is 22 hours long and people experience the world as normal with their eyes open but when they close their eyes they get a like high resolution movie like version of prior experien but they have agency within those movies they can reshape their reactions this is being used to treat PTSD and Veterans uh to great success um it has some cardiac risk associated with it so and it's not legal in the United States it's not being explored in clinical trials yet but the state of Kentucky recently took I think it's $40 million from the um oxyc conton settlement and it's putting it to iag research interesting yeah so those are the two that kind of spring to mind you know kind of the classic psychedelic experience I've also heard good things about MDMA but I've never done that yeah I have done MDMA uh as part again as part of a therapeutic trial it's a strong empathogen um the danger with MDMA I think is that um if you don't stay in the eye mask or if you're listening to music or something you can easily get anchor to some external Quee and like see a plant and be like I love plants and spend the whole four to six hours thinking about your love of plants which might be valuable but I think the strong introspective work um is best done with a therapist there and you and the ey mask and occasionally leaving the ey mask and writing things down so you know the reason I put that detail in there is that um the Psychedelic experience is very different with eyes open versus in the eye mask with a clinici there versus recreationally and it's not just about dangers versus safety it's also about like it's a big investment and what what one stands to get out of it I think depends on how much introspection you're willing to do we won't be doing it this afternoon there were at least a thousand questions about attention deficit and neuroticism people who feel like they can't organize themselves and I thought a lot about these questions and tried to distill them into a single question and eventually I did and it's this for many people they associate the creative process with disorganization I think what's so striking about you is that you embody both the creative process but also a strong sense of organization around it like nothing seems hairbrained or like random or halfhazard about anything that you do and yet for a lot of people who call themselves creatives they they'll say I'm a creative this that and you'll look at the space they're in and it's like chaos or they or their life is kind of chaos not all of them but is what I'm saying making sense because I think why people Orient toward you and one of the reasons for your success with the creative process is that you're extremely organized but but not to the point of being rigid are you willing to embellish a little bit on that perception whether or not it's accurate inacurate say there's a part in the process early on where it is before it can get organized where it's free and it's playful and it can be chaotic um it's just not the it's a byproduct of whatever is happening it it's not it's good because it's chaotic and it's it just happens to be sometimes chaotic in that in that experiment in the beginning where we're really playing with this idea of of having fun and creating stimulation and seeing how it makes us feel and we try a lot of we could try wacky things to get there um but then when it happens when you get that that feeling of like oh this is interesting I haven't seen this before then it gets more um controlled but it starts in a very free place and I I I don't know if I would really use the word chaotic but it could be I it certainly wouldn't be wrong I would say more free would be the word free like no um no expectation and total immersion in like an improvisation that you're participating in that can go wherever it wants to go and you're cool allowing it to go wherever it wants to go and sometimes when it goes somewhere dangerous that's when it gets interesting so the the I can understand that that danger aspect maybe that's why I like pro wrestling I don't know but there's something about when you get to this these edges where this is not for everybody it can get very interesting speaking of um stuff that's not for everybody and that to some people might have been shocking I remember hearing Ghetto Boys for the first time and like whoa like they're taking certain things pretty far when you're working with an artist and they venture out into that place where things are like maybe even a little shocking what is that feeling for you internally like is it how do you distinguish between shock value for its own sake and something that's really opening up a new creative Avenue or Insight like like how do you do you recall the first time you you heard like Bushwick and those guys do their thing yeah what what was your internal narrative I can't believe it I can't believe what they're saying it's really um pushing the boundaries of what anyone has said in this music before it had switched because the the original in originally in rap there was a lot of boasting about themselves bragging and then we got to uh the message happened and there was some social commentary then there was gangster rap and then the Ghetto Boys took a version of gangster rap and turned it into horror rap which was much more graphic than gangster rap gangster rap was talking about a um a real life situation whereas the Ghetto Boys took it into horror movie territory it was more fantasy um but it seemed really scary at the time in the way that a you're scared at a great horor movie do you like horror movies I don't do you like monster movies to where you know it's not real like it's impossible uh as opposed to horror movies where you know it's um you know people getting killed by another human like stuff that could happen in the world versus um you know monsters and zombies and that kind of thing I don't think I really like either of them very much I like things that make me feel good I don't really like adrenaline you know I don't like to be excited for some reason in audio I like something that makes me excited but in visuals I tend not to like things that make me excited interesting and you're able to kind of clean yourself of experiences easily right like it seems like if you listen to something it's really shocking you don't carry that shock to your sleep or to the next day like it doesn't trouble you but a movie can can impact me like there was a movie called Melancholia that I saw years ago Lars vont Trier movie and I thought it was a very beautiful movie but I was in a bad mood I would say for 3 months from the time I watched that movie on it just like did something to my brain that didn't feel good and it couldn't snap out of it so interesting there there are a few movies that have done that to me the movie Blue Valentine which has done really well um which is with uh Ryan goling and someone else where um it's a relationship I won't explain what happens in The Arc of the relationship but it just like the movie Haunted me m there's one scene where he's wearing a misfit shirt and I was like I like the and that's a a particularly good scene where he's singing to her um but the rest of the movie just brings about such feelings of like just how hard life can be sometimes and how misguided people can be in relationship and it it's interesting how movies can just kind of embed in us it's not pleasant I don't want to talk about it anymore there were a number of questions asking about how you consume information in the world related to what's happening in the world like where do you get your news from you and I talk about this a lot how do how do we know what to trust these days um did should we have ever trusted the news or is is it less trustworthy now like where do you get your information about what's happening in the world and stay a breast of like world affairs I I honestly I don't feel like I know anything about it you know I um I tend to look at it all like wrestling so if the story's good I might be more interested in the story but I still don't hold much uh belief that that story is true yeah I don't know what to believe anymore uh I was asked to comment on a particularly well-known person who's not considered very Savory by a couple news Avenues in the last couple of years and um I don't know how people had in mind that I would have knowledge about this person and and I gave zero information to these news outlets and um nonetheless they they they didn't publish quotes from me but they they publish things that I know to be completely false and they know to be completely false so I I was just struck by the fact that like in scientific publishing that would get you you'd lose your job forever well at one point in time you would have lost your job now I don't know if that's true if you lose your job because we see it happening a lot right yeah it's wild have you ever read anything about you that's not true oh yeah yeah okay so based on that absolutely I mean some of it is playful stuff like on Reddit and now they're flagged as as play they have a little flag that they can put as you know comedic or something but oh sure I mean things not just taken out of context but things like completely wrong like just like that I I don't even know where people get this stuff from I keep waiting for the thing I'm going to see that says that I'm dead yeah that that'll be the moment so based on that experience why would you believe anything you read about anyone else you you you get to see firsthand that there are just stories just not true and presumably you've seen things written about you that are not true absolutely right absolutely right and artists I know friends of mine they write things about them I know it's not true wild what do you think about the state of play and is the experience of being a parent and having a young child has that allowed you more opportunities for play and to see through the world through childlike lenses in uh greater capacity or is it you know just separate from your creative process I would say I'm fairly childlike all the time I try to stay as uh open the beauty of childhood is that you don't know you haven't been um indoctrinated yet so you you see things and you have wonder about them and it's a great feeling that feeling of Wonder and now when someone I I'll tell you a story this is a a true story my friend Owen came over one night in the middle of the night and he had just seen um luminescence in the water for the first time and he had didn't know what what it was and thought he was having mystical experience and he was so excited he's like you won't believe what happened the W the waves were like there was light everywhere it was so cool i' never saw anything like it and I said oh yeah that's uh luminesence and I explained what it was and it destroyed the magic for him he was really having a childlike magical experience and I destroyed it by telling them the science behind it I try to live in a world where I can experience what he experiences and I don't let the story ruin what's I allow the possibility to go past what I'm told the story is but that things can be even wilder than the rational explanation for me learning the reductionist science behind something to me adds depth and Beauty but then again I realize I'm I've been indoctrinated into the the field of science so the Matrix they call it the Matrix this is one I didn't understand but I'm going to assume that you understand because it has to do with people you've worked with if Rick had casually dropped that the Ramones named themselves after the fake last name Paul McCartney used to check into hotels during Beetle Mania would that have blown Andrew's mind this kind of weird question I guess the question is is it true that the Ramones name themselves after the fake last name that Paul McCartney used to check into hotels during Beetle Mania um I don't know that I don't know if that's a true story I do know that Paul McCartney used the name Paul Ramon when checking into hotels but I don't know if that's where the Ramon got the name got it and here is how rumors turn into quote unquote facts on the internet so we have and also maybe the Paul raone story is not true either but that's story I've heard right that reminds me and and I think this is an important case in point that there's a what I can consider a very famous photograph of you Johnny Cash Joe Strummer and Henry Rollins mhm you're wearing a dead Kennedy shirt the four of you are facing one another and I love that photograph because of who's in it um and I remember hearing a rare track from Strummer and the mescaleros called uh on the road to rock and roll um and then for some reason probably because my phone is tapped into my brain I was served up a video on social media of Henry Rollins telling the story of that Gathering of the four of you where Rollins is describing the story of of uh Joe Strummer leaning into Johnny Cash and saying hey I wrote a song for you it goes on the road to rock okay and I remember coming to you and saying Rick guess what remember that photo you're like I remember the photo I said yeah Rollins has the story of what was happening in that moment and I was so excited and you said you said yeah I don't remember that it might be true it might be true but it might be entirely made up also yeah and we're not calling Henry a liar but Henry I I I believe Henry I believe Henry remembers that story and that was his experience that was not my experience or I don't remember it being my experience but who knows anything could have been said it's true anything could have been said like it it had as much to to do the fact that I don't remember has as much to do with whatever I was thinking about when that happened and the story that Henry told had as much to do with what was going on in Henry's head when it happened we have no idea you know it's we have no idea do you remember somebody shooting the photograph I do not I'll put a link to that photograph on the Internet it's a really incredible Gathering of I've seen the photo but I don't remember it being sh I'm looking for a high resolution version of that photo if anyone can find me one I'll be happy to compensate you well there were a lot of questions about your daily routine people love this the morning routine the daily routine and while I have to believe that everybody's necessary routine is quite different from the next um if you wouldn't mind just giving us a sense of like the first couple hours of your day what that typically looks like when you're like not traveling and you're settled into to a place uh it's different depending on the place that I'm in but typically it involves waking up going out into the Sun as naked as possible to start the day um I try to take slowly um wake up slowly and probably within an hour of that I'll leave the house and go for as long of a beachwalk as possible or if I'm in a place where there's a gym several days a week I'll go to the gym instead but some I'll do some activity I would say about an hour after waking up sometimes it's an hour and a half sometimes it's less depending on the place I'm at I also might do stretching before I go on the walk and do um just several stretches on yoga mats on the floor or uh with foam rollers or balls or some different things I don't start my day until those things are out of the way I try to avoid um any work related anything now that that said if a thought comes up that I'm excited about I'll note it I won't um avoid thoughts but I tend not to engage in any work until probably 11:00 11:00 a.m. would be the soonest and in and some days not until 1:00 and then I do focused work until maybe six and then I spend the rest of the night uh trying to wind down out of work mode so one p.m. to 6 p.m. are really the peak probably quote unquote work hours yeah could be 11: too like today we started here at 11: and that felt like I felt like I'd be good by 11: and I already did my my morning walk I had the argument on the beach I I was in the sun I was in the hot tub I had a whole whole morning already and then what does your evening wind down look like in terms of the space that you're in uh or trying to create and your internal landscape well it's only red light um I'm usually wearing from the time sun sets I'm wearing red glasses I'm in a space with only red light I'm uh 99 % of the time home with my family and we talk I might watch uh wrestling or a documentary with red glasses on um we eat dinner together or we eat dinner in shifts depending on how it's working but we're all we're all together and I find something to occupy my mind that gets me out of the workday that said sometimes the ideas still flow and I'll note them but I avoid I avoid any kind of a work phone call or um anything that's stimulating or that will get me thinking about it I aim for Sunset and then I'm usually in bed I'm usually in bed by 10: and um and fall asleep within 15 minutes your relationship to light is fascinating the sunlight piece makes a lot of sense and will make sense to the listeners of this podcast we haven't done too many episodes but we will do more that covers the trying to avoid bright light exposure in the evening um you're wearing the red uh lens glasses now even though it's the middle of the day that's because we've got these bright lights around us correct and have you found that limiting your bright artificial light exposure in the evening has benefited you and in what ways absolutely and and once you've done it once you've changed and avoid like looking at screens or my you know my phone turns red at night when I see someone else's phone if someone comes to visit and their phone lights up at night it's blinding and it's so disturbing and for them that's normal they're in this heightened blown out place all the time I'm staying at neutral I'm staying at at the the the more natural how how the world would be if man didn't create all of these uh these loud things loud loud um loud devices yeah I've switched my phone thanks to your input and we will have released a clip on this um by time this episode airs on the triple click approach to the phone that you can put in very easily um to allow it to go from regular screen to red screen at night so that you don't have to go into the settings each time you just triple click U we'll provide a link to that um explanation and Rick taught me that when I was over in Italy everyone in his home turned to me and uh said wait your phone is so bright you got to do the red light thing I said I don't know how and it taught me that so it's a very useful trick um have you no is the difference since looking at huge positive difference I sleep better there are great data now because of course I go there and find the data that um you know for shift workers people that have to be up at night working if they put them under red light the amount of cortisol at that time is suppressed which is great um as compared to when they're under bright artificial lights without red lens glasses or if they're in red lights it's far far more beneficial less cortisol you want cortisol High early in the day viewing sunlight early in the day increases it by at least 50% then you want it to taper off uh and on and on I heard something recently which is going to make a lot of sense one thing that's happened in the last 30 years which may at least partially explain the Obesity crisis is that calories which are depleted of nutrients micronutrients are very cheap now see they're very cheap to get calories but they aren't nut nutritious calories in addition there's been a change in lighting technology so that blue light photons are very cheap like when I was a kid they my parents would say turn off the lights it's costing us all this money now it's very cheap to keep the lights on in a home the heat is a different story but with respect so we have a lot of cheap photons so I think of blue light as cheap photons not the good for you photons not nourishing photons that's correct and consuming calories too often are at the wrong times of we know is bad for you consuming photons in the wrong form at the wrong time of day bad for you and I think those two things combined plus all the downstream negative Cascades can largely explain the Obesity and in some sense Mental Health crisis interesting yeah so just a there I editorialized again I realized that we're trying to shift the ratio to more Rick less Andrew but he can't help himself he can't help himself and Rick indulges me so actually there were a number of questions in here that asked me you know how has Rick helped you and I I'm refraining from answering those cuz this is people want your answers for them but I I do all the things that Rick's referring to I'm not wearing red lens glasses now but I have changed a lot of my health practices Andor sought out science to test whether or not some of the things that you've been doing for a while make sense and indeed in every case they've made sense I'm not just saying that because because you're here but you and I do a lot of the same things yeah we're in we're interested and if it didn't work we'd probably stop doing it eventually right it's like we're testing things right and I do believe that what start starts out as crazy like Mike mener stuff of low volume weight training with heavy weights it works so much better than the high volumes all that stuff is being shown to be true in these peer-reviewed trials so you know that's the nature of science it often comes science often follows the practitioners by many decades MH you know it doesn't get there first because it's a slower more iterative process but some people need to see those clinical trials to feel comfortable doing something I think the cre process is uniquely separated from academic science and academic scholarship in a way that I think has really benefited it I mean can you imagine if the Ghetto Boys had to get a degree in music theory in order to do what they do they wouldn't be the Ghetto boys right or Slayer they would not be Slayer yeah or Public Enemy yes or Adele yes or Eminem right it's it's almost by virtue of the fact that there is no degree for that yeah per se that allowed them to do what they did right yeah absolutely so what are your thoughts on schooling and higher education or just education I mean you were at NYU when you launched your record label you graduated NYU I did um what are your thoughts on getting a a quote unquote formal education uh it seems like an obsolete idea I think maybe there was a time where it would have been helpful and maybe depending on the if the thing that you want to study um can only be learned in an institution maybe it would make sense but I think the real world um getting an internship or a um finding the right mentor and going into the whatever the thing is that you're interested in learning about learning from people who do it as opposed to uh the the system I think I think might be more a better use of your time the creative process doesn't exist in a vacuum and relationships are a huge part of life one thing that I've heard you say and that certainly I've been working to internalize is this idea that whatever relationships one has in their life romantic relationships or not married or not kids or not that the ideal circumstance is where one's work is the most stressful part of their life yes you tell us more about that yeah the the home is the um the safe place from which you can go out and be a warrior and do all these great things and these crazy things you know I have um I'm fearless when it comes to Art I'm not Fearless when it comes to life life is my relationships art is where we can do these crazy things and have fun and um try extreme things and see what happens and as to say that's a safe place to do that because it's it's just expression it's not um the things we make don't have to represent who we are they're just the things we make and that's a point of view it's like this is interesting to me in this moment check it out that's all it is may have a completely different feeling tomorrow was in a relationship it's it's longterm hopefully and it's it's as longterm as it's a productive relationship where everybody's getting what they want from that relationship everybody's needs are being met and everybody cares enough to meet each other's needs I've always admired how rational you are about relationships and this notion that like if everybody isn't being honest there's no relationship actually yeah not it's a bad relationship but there's actually no relationship no because if you if you if someone's not telling the truth then each person is experiencing a different understanding of the world they're living in two different worlds so they're not they're never actually together when you're exper experiencing a different world so unless you can you don't have to agree I'm not saying you have to agree on everything but you have to be truthful in saying this is how I see it and your partner is clear in yes this is how I see it or no this is how I see it you're on the same you're on the same page even even in disagreement but it's real it's you're you're being who each of you are being Who You Are for and with the other but if you're not opening yourself up in that way to your partner you're in a different world they have an idea of what's Happening that's completely different than what you have an idea of what's Happening that's not that's not being together no masks no no it's the it's the same as what when you said earlier about lying in your diary you'd only be doing a disservice to yourself lying in a relationship would only be doing a disservice to yourself Mike Ness of Social Distortion has a song called cheating at solitire which seems like an appropriate title to mention right now lying in the diary cheating at solitire yeah it's ridiculous doesn't make any sense no you're not you're not actually playing the game do you know what I mean if you're cheating at it you're not actually playing the game the whole point of the game is the game if you cheat at it you're not playing the game do you have any mustre books for people I'll I'll throw one out Rick's book on the creative act um a way of being uh but in addition to that book what are some books that you recommend to people for stimulating thought or for um I don't know Health purposes or things that you found particularly beneficial in book form my favorite book about meditation is called wherever you go there you are I love it and I just got sent the 30th Anniversary Edition which is completely Rewritten I have not yet read the re the Rewritten version but I love the original version and I know the Rewritten version I'm guessing that the Rewritten version is just more refined and even better such a great book that book was given to me when I was about 14 and a half uh when I was um released from a particularly uncomfortable nonv voluntary um uh State of Affairs and one of the things that I remember about that book that helped me through so many years of life and I have to go back to is this mountain visualization meditation being a mountain mhm I don't know why it was so helpful but goodness was it helpful for me it's a beautiful idea it's a beautiful idea yeah I don't know why I thought of that just now but I'm going to go back and read it do you think that there's genetic epigenetic family lineage stuff unrelated to genetics that leads us to create things that are really about like our ancestors you know the for instance um is it possible that uh let's take let's take Johnny Cash for instance or an artist worked with more recently Chili Peppers that when they got together to make music that something from Anthony's Family line was being transmuted through him into into the songs uh is that happening do you think that we can work out and and include things that are Generations far back enough that we don't we don't even really know what happened to them I mean it's coming through in our genes I think it's certainly possible but I I don't think we can know and I know think it's necessarily even helpful to know it just is one of those mysterious things I don't think we know why we do many of the things we do and it's just another example of that and that's a possible Theory to explain why we do the things we do maybe but there may be another one it maybe uh UFOs are controlling us I don't know do you know what I'm saying it's it could be anything there are people on the internet that think it's UFOs that are controlling us could be I don't I wouldn't um I wouldn't disagree with that more and more evidence is coming out that you know that uh unidentified flying objects might might actually be a documented phenomenon by the US government I I haven't looked into it yet but I wouldn't be surprised when you were on this podcast before and on several other podcasts you mentioned that you don't play music at least not routinely you don't play an instrument um that you have limited knowledge of how a soundboard works so when you're listening to artists are you listening for something or you're staying open for something that you might hear like that that will trigger a certain state in you that you recognize I'm open to just see what's happening like I I feel what's I I listen and recognize is this making me Lean Forward am I curious to see what's going to happen next is the thing that happens next different than what I thought was going to happen next that could be interesting you know I listen to a lot of music when it doesn't do what's expected that's really interesting especially if it sounds good if it works um so I'm just open to experiencing what it is and I'll say something funny about it which is this this will sound um mystical I don't understand it but often you can tell a lot about the piece of music you're going to listen to based on the first sound you hear like the first moment it's not about what node it is it's not about what instrument it is it's uh intention in the performance and that performance could even be a machine the way when something starts sometimes there's this feeling of oh this is going to be good just out of the bo the downbeat can't explain it reminds me of dating uh and you know within half a nan second like this is going to be a fun night this be interesting night this person's interesting or okay this is not a night to continue right I don't know there's something and and it's not what said necessarily or even how it said just it's a it's a feeling I know that depending on how I'm feeling I'll avoid listening critically to something if I'm not feeling well if I'm if I don't feel like I can be completely there and open I'll not listen I I know I know I want to really be there for the thing that I'm uh listening to do you inform people if like hey I'm not here today like I'm I can't sometimes yeah sometimes as somebody who has never been part of the music production process how long does it take like for an album like let's throw out an artist you've worked with like you worked with Eminem how long did that well you did some songs on that album or the whole album I did some songs so did he come in with those written and then you guys work together on those songs how long was that a week a month a day I think we were together for several weeks it's been long enough now that I can't remember the specifics but there there is no rule of how that works and sometimes things come together very quickly an album can be made in a weekend and some albums are years in the making when it's years in the making it's rarely every day for years in the making it's usually more episodic but there is something both versions are very interesting and it's something that comes out almost fully formed very quickly has particular energy and then something that's made over [Music] time can have all of those individual moments all the changes that happen within you over that period of time those can all be reflected and be the difference between between a daily diary journal and reading 3 months it's different they're two different things can't say one's better than the other they're just two different things so some projects are more like a Year's diary and some are more like a weekend and same you know you watch a movie some movies the movie story takes place in 24 hours and sometimes it's a person's lifetime one's not better than the one's not a better method than the other it's whatever suits the work speaking of your work with Eminem but also with Jay-Z and with Beasty Boys and others you are featured in a number of the videos you show up in those videos whose decision was that and um what are your thoughts on music videos I remember when music videos first came out the whole MTV era and just things like this is so cool I can see the artists see how they're dressed the like the crazy Styles and all of that that accompany the music two questions one whose decision was it to be in the videos because producers often are not included in the videos it would always be if the artists asked that' be the only reason I would be there and two what are your thoughts on music videos and the idea that then it puts a very strong visual to the the song whereas were there not to be a video people could just imagine something based on what they're hearing and hearing alone they're two different there're two different things there's not a better or worse there's sometimes where the video makes the song better and there's often the case where the Poetry of the words um if you close your eyes and listen to what the words are as a listener you get to participate in that in creating that world in your head so sometimes photographs can tell us too much information it's too leading it limits the story to just this Photograph the photograph tells you much more than the words the words can be interpreted in many ways and then we each get to have that experience it's something in the book that I was uh cognizant of in picking the words was never to be specific to the point of where the reader doesn't get to participate in this act so it doesn't tell you what to think it's an invitation to think it's an invitation to say Where am I in this what's my version of this it's not about anyone else it's about the reader and that was um it was from the beginning that was always part of the um my understanding of what I thought would be the most helpful the cover certainly embodies that that it it's not clear exactly what the cover design is quote unquote supposed to be it's open to interpretation you interpret it as you wish and different people see different things let's get current what what are you working on now that you're excited about if you can share let me see what I can and can't share could be broad categories of things too but okay uh I'm working on a couple of um documentary projects that I'm excited about and some albums that I've been working on over time are are coming out um one is a incredible singer guitar player named Marcus King his album's about to come out uh the gossip is a band that I made an album with 10 years ago and we just made a new album or we made an album Maybe 18 months ago and that's coming out now um those are the first ones that come to mind is the documentary process fun for you and how how do you approach that uh I watch a lot of documentaries to learn what I don't want to do I don't think I've been inspired well maybe some cases where I get inspired by what I'm seeing but more often I see things and I say okay these documentaries all have this format so I know I don't want it to be this format um um it's more of a ruling out and it's fun to find new ways that reveal different information than the standard format allows it's interesting to me I we'll see if anyone else cares you have a unique approach to podcasting uh first of all what are your criteria for who you invite on as a guest and second um what do you have in mind when you sit down and podcast um I have some ideas about how you're going to answer but I think it's important that and not inject and that uh I think people are interested in this even if they don't want a podcast because I think it it gets to the process of something that you're doing now and how you're doing it now yeah um I didn't set out to do what I'm about to tell you I didn't set out to do this but it's something that after I started doing it I came to realize it it's an interesting thing and I actually learned this from listening to your podcast it was actually Lex's podcast with you and I was listening to the podcast and I know you know Lex and I know you guys are friends and both of you in addition to you talking to Lex you're talking to the audience and Lex in addition to talking to you talks to the audience and the audience was a participant in your conversation and I realize that in at the tetraman podcast it's different than that it's more of an intimate personal like the interview with you that hasn't come out yet that was me talking to you with no I certainly didn't have any idea that anybody else was going to hear it other than yes someone else is going to hear it but that's not what this is this is I was asking you the questions I was interested in and I wanted to learn as much as I could and if you said something either that I didn't understand I'd ask you to explain it or if you told me a story about something that sent me on a tangent that would I want to know more about this left side of what you said or the right side of what you said I would ask but only following my own interests so it has a an intimacy it's turned into when I if I listen to a tetr gramon podcast it sounds like I'm overhearing a conversation a personal conversation and it it has turned into parts of certain decisions we made like having there's music at the beginning and then you hear the guest more often than not is in the middle of a story and it's almost as if you've walked into a room and people are in this deep conversation and you're just sitting on on the side quietly and hearing this conversation and it's a a real moment that's happening there and it's just different I can't say it's better I can't say it's worse can't say I don't know what what's interesting about it but something about it's interesting to me and when I listen to it I feel a different kind of an intimacy um and again it wasn't premeditated this is after the fact I'm looking back and understanding oh this is what it is this is why this is different yeah the podcast that I did with you on your podcast when I was featured as I guess the second time I I completely forgot that we were podcasting it was also good we'd had a few days together overseas there we're in a very kind of isolated environment that helped me get out of the mode of there are listeners yeah there's no there's no sense of performance involved it's it couldn't be more casual and the reason I chose not to film it is because the nature of lights and cameras make it harder to forget that you're doing it so I aim for it to be as natural an experience so that you can have the conversation that you really would have if there were no lights and cameras not that not that we want to reveal anything it's just it's a level of comfort and openness where you're talking to somebody you like and it's you're enjoying the conversation and that's so you I just have to share that you know the first time we met in person you and I had facetimed a number of times previous to that but the first time we met in person came over to your house we ended up doing sauna and cold and I was going through a particularly challenging time in my life I mean it had really just hit me square in the face and I remember saying Hey listen I I don't know we could talk about this but I just opened up about all of it and that's the moment when like we would have become friends anyway but that's where things really took off because I kept apologizing at the end I I'm so sorry and you said no no this is actually what we're supposed to do yeah and you know I'm feel very grateful that we've remained close friends ever since and that catalyzed a lot but I think that one of the things I love about podcasts not just podcasting but podcast is is that the really effective podcasts like yours like Lex's like Rogan like Rich rooll Tim Ferris they really reflect the love and passion that the person has for that kind of conversation I mean I can certainly say this about my podcast I I've been learning organizing and distributing information since I was you know you know six years old mhm so my podcast is just that you you like real conversation and real things that are unb barriered by like the idea that maybe someone's going to listen and how will it work out just like we talked about earlier and you answered the questions that way and I think Lex likes Lex's form of thing and Joe is doing his form of thing and I think that's to me one of the great gifts of podcasting if anyone wants to know how to create a successful podcast quote unquote successful it's have the kind of conversations and talk about the kinds of things you really love like Cameron Haynes has this lift run shoot podcast where you go to his house you do a workout then you go for run and then he teaches you archery and the reason it's so effective is that he loves lifting running and shooting and then he and he loves teaching people that so at the end of the day you're sitting down talking about a great day that embodies everything that he's about in and the person learned and like I couldn't do that podcast I can go on as a guest and I loved being a guest but I think that's the message and it brings us back to what you were talking about earlier and throughout today's discussion is that if you're thinking about how it's going to land how the hell could it ever work yeah it's just a different thing I had a conversation yesterday uh for the podcast with Daniel kuuya who I've never met before incredible actor and beautiful human being and we probably talked for about 3 hours and it was a deep conversation and I feel like I might have a new best friend like he's unbelievable the coolest guy if it wasn't doing the podcast I don't know if I would have met him it just worked out it worked out that I got to meet this incredible person well Rick we covered most of the most frequently asked questions and you've been extremely gracious with your time and thoughtfulness in answering them and um I don't know what to say except thank you for taking the time to do yet another podcast to answer the audience's questions they were here in this podcast in the form of this very large stack of of questions and of course your book includes a lot of information that encapsulates this but I think this really fleshes out some of the the details of like how you go about things how certain things can't be the same for everybody and um I think in answering these questions you provided a great service to people who are perhaps still struggling with getting the creative process going or flowing um I'm certain that it's going to change the way that I focus and lean into my day I've got a number of different notes here and maybe I'll be willing to share them with people but then that would go against the principle of this is for me and everyone's going to work it out their own way so we'll provide links to everything that was mentioned where there's a link that's relevant and you man I want just want to say thank you so much for being such an incredible educator and such an incredible friend as well thank you it's a funny idea of being an educator I can't imagine that but I appreciate the uh I appreciate those words well you you are indeed an educator we're learning so much from you and and if you just step back for a second and think about all the creative works that have stemmed and are going to stem from the learnings that people have achieved from hearing your experience in wisdom it's um incalculable wow I'll take it thank you sir thank you for joining me for today's discussion about protocols for creativity with the one and only Rick Rubin please also be sure to check out the links in the show captions in particular to Rick's incredible book all about the creative process entitled the creative act a way of being if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a five-star review if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guesss you'd like me to consider on the huberman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTu YouTube I do read all the comments please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast not so much on today's episode but on many previous episodes of The hubman Lab podcast we discuss supplements while supplements aren't necessary for everybody many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like improving sleep for hormone support and for improving Focus to learn more about the supplements discussed on the huberman Lab podcast go to live momentus spelled o us so Liv mous.com / huberman if you're not already following me on social media I am huberman lab on Instagram X formerly called Twitter LinkedIn Facebook and threads and at all of those places I discuss science and science related tools some of which overlaps with the content of the hubman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the content covered on the hubman Lab podcast so again it's huberman lab on all social media channels if you haven't already subscribe to our neural network newsletter our neural network newsletter is a zeroc cost newsletter that comes out every month it includes podcast summaries as well as protocols in the form of short PDFs of maybe just one to three pages where I list out the specific protocols for instance for improving dopamine functioning or for improving your sleep or for deliberate cold exposure deliberate heat exposure or Fitness protocols and on and on all of which are presented in brief fashion very direct just the protocols listed out again completely zero cost to sign up you simply go to huberman lab.com go to the menu function scroll down to newsletter and enter your email and I should point out that we do not share your email with anybody thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Rick rubben and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 161 ---
Video ID: n28W4AmvMDE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n28W4AmvMDE
Title: Dr. Robert Lustig: How Sugar & Processed Foods Impact Your Health
Published: 2023-12-18 13:00:39 UTC
Description:
In this episode, my guest is Dr. Robert Lustig, M.D., neuroendocrinologist, professor of pediatrics at the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), and a bestselling author on nutrition and metabolic health. We address the “calories in- calories out” (CICO) model of metabolism and weight regulation and how specific macronutrients (protein, fat, carbohydrates), fiber and sugar can modify the CICO equation. We cover how different types of sugars, specifically fructose, sugars found in liquid form, taste intensity, and other factors impact insulin levels, liver, kidney, and metabolic health. We also explore how fructose in non-fruit sources can be addictive (acting similarly to drugs of abuse) and how sugar alters brain circuits related to food cravings and satisfaction. We discuss the role of sugar in childhood and adult obesity, gut health and disease and mental health. We also discuss how the food industry uses refined sugars to create pseudo foods and what these do to the brain and body. This episode is replete with actionable information about sugar and metabolism, weight control, brain health and body composition. It ought to be of interest to anyone seeking to understand how specific food choices impact the immediate and long-term health of the brain and body.

For the show notes, including referenced articles and additional resources, please visit https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/dr-robert-lustig-how-sugar-processed-foods-impact-your-health

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman 
Levels: https://levels.link/huberman 
AeroPress: https://aeropress.com/huberman 
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman 
Momentous: https://livemomentous.com/huberman 

Huberman Lab Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

Dr. Robert Lustig
Website: https://robertlustig.com 
Books: https://robertlustig.com/books
Publications: https://robertlustig.com/publications
Blog: https://robertlustig.com/blog
UCSF academic profile: https://profiles.ucsf.edu/robert.lustig 
Metabolical (book): https://amzn.to/48mNhOE
SugarScience: http://sugarscience.ucsf.edu 
X: https://twitter.com/RobertLustigMD
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/DrRobertLustig
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/robert-lustig-8904245 
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/robertlustigmd 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@robertlustigmd 

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Robert Lustig
00:02:02 Sponsors: Eight Sleep, Levels & AeroPress
00:06:41 Calories, Fiber
00:12:15 Calories, Protein & Fat, Trans Fats
00:18:23 Carbohydrate Calories, Glucose vs. Fructose, Fruit, Processed Foods
00:26:43 Fructose, Mitochondria & Metabolic Health
00:31:54 Trans Fats; Food Industry & Language 
00:35:33 Sponsor: AG1
00:37:04 Glucose, Insulin, Muscle
00:42:31 Insulin & Cell Growth vs. Burn; Oxygen & Cell Growth, Cancer
00:51:14 Glucose vs. Fructose, Uric Acid; “Leaky Gut” & Inflammation
01:00:51 Supporting the Gut Microbiome, Fasting
01:04:13 Highly Processed Foods, Sugars; “Price Elasticity” & Food Industry
01:10:28 Sponsor: LMNT
01:11:51 Processed Foods & Added Sugars
01:14:19 Sugars, High-Fructose Corn Syrup
01:18:16 Food Industry & Added Sugar, Personal Responsibility, Public Health
01:30:04 Obesity, Diabetes, “Hidden” Sugars
01:34:57 Diet, Insulin & Sugars
01:38:20 Tools: NOVA Food Classification; Perfact Recommendations
01:43:46 Meat & Metabolic Health, Eggs, Fish
01:46:44 Sources of Omega-3s; Vitamin C & Vitamin D
01:52:37 Tool: Reduce Inflammation; Sugars, Cortisol & Stress
01:59:12 Food Industry, Big Pharma & Government; Statins
02:06:55 Public Health Shifts, Rebellion, Sugar Tax, Hidden Sugars
02:12:58 Real Food Movement, Public School Lunches & Processed Foods
02:18:25 3 Fat Types & Metabolic Health; Sugar, Alcohol & Stress
02:26:40 Artificial & Non-Caloric Sweeteners, Insulin & Weight Gain
02:34:32 Re-Engineering Ultra-Processed Food
02:38:45 Sugar & Addiction, Caffeine
02:45:18 GLP-1, Semaglutide (Ozempic, Wegovy, Tirzepatide), Risks; Big Pharma 
02:57:39 Obesity & Sugar Addiction; Brain Re-Mapping, Insulin & Leptin Resistance
03:03:31 Fructose & Addiction, Personal Responsibility & Tobacco
03:07:27 Food Choices: Fruit, Rice, Tomato Sauce, Bread, Meats, Fermented Foods
03:12:54 Intermittent Fasting, Diet Soda, Food Combinations, Fiber, Food Labels
03:19:14 Improving Health, Advocacy, School Lunches, Hidden Sugars
03:26:55 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify & Apple Reviews, YouTube Feedback, Sponsors,  Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

#HubermanLab #Science #Nutrition

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine my guest today is Dr Robert lustig Dr Robert lustig is an endocrinologist that is he's a specialist in the function of hormones in the body and a professor of Pediatric Endocrinology at the University of California San Francisco he has authored more than 100 peer-reviewed studies exploring how different types of nutrients that is food impact our cellular functioning our organ functioning and thereby our health during today's discussion we discussed the idea of whether or not a calorie is indeed a calorie and whether or not our body weight and body composition only reflects the number of calories we eat versus the calories that we burn we talk about how different food types that is how the different macronutrients protein fat and carbohydrates are processed in the body and the important role that fiber and the gut microbiome plays in that process and we pay particular attention to the topic of how different types of sugars and fructose in particular can indeed be addictive to the brain and can modify the way that hormones in the body in particular insulin impact our Liver Health Kidney Health and indeed the health of all of our cells and organs indeed Dr lustig is an expert in how sugar impacts the brain and body we talk about how certain types of sugars can indeed be addictive in the same way that certain drugs of abuse and behaviors can become addictive so in other words how sugar actually changes the way that the brain works and we discuss how the food industry that is the commoditization and sale of particular types of food has altered the way that we eat and indeed the foods that We crave today's discussion covers all of that and by the end of today's discussion you'll have a thorough understanding of how foods are processed when they enter your body and how those different food choices are impacting your immediate and long-term Health before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is eight sleep eight sleep makes Smart mattress covers with cooling Heating and sleep tracking capacity I've spoken many times before in this podcast about the fact that sleep is the foundation of Mental Health physical health and performance now a key component of getting a great night's sleep is that in order to fall and stay deeply asleep your body temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3 de and in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized your body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3° one of the best ways to make sure that those temperature changes occur at the appropriate times at the beginning and throughout and at the end of your night when you wake up is to control the temperature of your sleeping environment and that's what eight sleep allows you to do it allows you to program the temperature of your mattress and sleeping environment such that you fall and stay deeply asleep easily and wake up each morning feeling incredibly refreshed and energized I've been sleeping on an eight Sleep mattress cover for almost 3 years now and it has dramatically improved the quality of my sleep so much so that when I travel and I'm at a hotel or an Airbnb and I don't have access to my eight sleep I very much look forward to getting home because my sleep is always better when I sleep on my eights Sleep mattress cover if you'd like to try eights sleep you can go to 8sleep.com / huberman to get $150 off their pod 3 mattress cover eight sleep currently ships in the USA Canada UK select countries in the EU and Australia again that's 8sleep.com huberman today's episode is also brought To Us by levels levels is a program that lets you see how different foods affect your health by giving you real-time feedback on your diet using a continuous glucose monitor one of the most important factors in your immediate and long-term health is your blood sugar or blood glucose regulation with levels you can see how different foods and food combinations exercise and sleep patterns impact your blood glucose levels it's very easy to use you just put the monitor on the back of your arm and then you take your phone and you scan it over that monitor now and again and it downloads the data about your blood sugar levels in the preceding hours using levels has allowed me to learn a tremendous amount about what works best for me in terms of nutrition exercise work schedules and sleep so if you're interested in learning more about levels and trying a continuous glucose monitor you can go to levels. l/ huberman levels has launched a new CGM sensor that is smaller and has even better tracking than the previous version right now they're also offering an additional two free months of membership again that's levels. linkhub to try the new sensor and two free months of membership today's episode is also brought To Us by Aeropress Aeropress is similar to a French press for making coffee but is in fact a much better way to make coffee I first learned about Aeropress well over 10 years ago and I've been using one ever since Aeropress was developed by Allan Adler who was an engineer at Stanford and I knew of Allen because he had also built the so-called aobi frisbee which I believe at one time perhaps still now held the Guinness Book of World Records for furthest Throne object and I used to see Allan believe it or not at parks around paloalto testing out different aobi frisbees so he was sort of famous in our community for developing these different Feats of engineering that turned into commercial products now I love coffee I'm somebody that drinks coffee nearly every day usually about 90 to 120 minutes after I wake up in the morning although not always sometimes if I'm going to exercise I'll drink coffee first thing in the morning but I love love love coffee and what I've personally found is that by using the arero Press I can make the best possible tasting cup of coffee I don't know what exactly it is in the arero press that allows the same beans to be prepared into a cup of coffee that tastes that much better as compared to any other form of Brewing that coffee even the traditional French press the aerrow Press is extremely easy to use and it's extremely compact in fact I take it with me whenever I travel and I use it on the road in hotels even on planes I'll just ask for some hot water and I'll Brew my coffee or tea right there on the plane if you'd like to try Aeropress you can go to arero press.com huberman that's a r o p rs.com huberman to get 20% off any Aeropress coffee maker Aeropress sh anywhere in the USA Canada and over 60 other countries around the world again that's Aero press.com huberman to get 20% off and now for my discussion with Dr Robert lustig Dr Robert lustig welcome pleasure truly uh just being here being invited uh high honor really appreciate it and it's not doctor it's just Rob okay Rob I've been looking forward to this conversation for a long time I've seen your now famous can we also say Infamous but famous YouTube video about sugar we'll put a link to it in the show note captions it's been viewed many many millions of times yeah and I still can't figure out why that is you know I didn't think my mother would watch it and she didn't but 24 and a half million people did well I think people are very interested in what to eat what not to eat and we'll start off simply talking about what most everyone believes and understands which is that a calorie is a form of heat energy that's given off during the processing of some food bit or something if that's mysterious to people just understand that a calorie is a unit of energy and I was taught and still many many people worldwide believe that a calorie is a calorie meaning if I consume more calories in whatever form then I metabolize by thinking feeling moving exercising Etc then I will gain weight and if I consume fewer calories than I burn I will lose weight and we could talk a lot about where that weight loss comes from does it come from adapost body fat stores or from muscle or from protein or muscle of course is protein Etc but let's start off with is a calorie truly a calorie when it comes to the processing of different types of calories everyone thinks that obesity is about energy balance that is calories in calories out therefore two behaviors gluttony and sloth therefore if you're fat it's your fault therefore diet and exercise therefore any calorie can be part of a balanced diet therefore don't pick on our calories go pick on somebody else's calories this is actually actually what the food industry uses to assuage their culpability for the change in the food supply and the rise in obesity and chronic disease like diabetes now it is true that a calorie is that unit of energy that raises one gram of water one degre centigrate and so therefore a calorie burned is a calorie burned I don't argue that that's true that's you know the first law thermodynamics but that doesn't mean a calorie eaten is a calorie eaten that's not the same and that's where people get it wrong so let me give you some examples of how that calorie eaten is not a calorie eating you like almonds I do me too almonds are great okay you eat 160 calories in almonds how many of those do you absorb 130 you eat 160 you absorb 130 where' the other 30 go in the processing of that food energy no turn out the fiber in those almonds both soluble and insoluble fiber and by the way fiber is sort of the key to the kingdom in this story forms a gel on the inside of your intestin the insoluble fiber the cellulose forms a fishnet if you will lattice work on the inside of your dadum the soluble fiber which are globular plug the holes in that fish net together they form a secondary barrier you can actually see it on electron microscopy a whitish gel and that prevents absorption of those 30 calories so yes 130 get absorbed but many of them don't they end up going further down the intestine to the next part called the junam and that's where the microbiome is now everyone knows about the microbiome nowadays you know it's all the bacteria you know we always say when women are pregnant you're eating for two well we're always eating for 100 trillion now they have to eat well what do they eat they eat what you eat the question is how much did you get versus how much did they get well if you ate almonds they're getting those 30 calories so even though you count the calories at your lips that doesn't matter what really matters is counting the calories at your intestinal brush border okay and they're not the same so if you feed your gut that's a good thing because then your gut will take those calories and turn it into things like short chain fatty acids which end up being protective against chronic metabolic disease acetate propionate butyrate valorate those are actually good they're anti-inflammatory anti-alzheimer's because you fed your microbiome so even though you ate 160 you absorbed 130 so a calorie eaten is not a calorie eaten because if you ate it with fiber it wasn't for you it was for your bacteria but that's not the way you count them up so that's problem number one problem number two amino acids so we all eat protein let's say you eat too much protein yeah you know the Porter House steak all right now if you're a bodybuilder those amino acids might go to muscle and you might increase your muscle mass because you're a bodybuilder because you're putting uh excess uh force on those muscles and you're growing those muscles okay but let's say you're not a bodybuilder let's say you're a mmortal like me or let's say you're a kid going through puberty who's synthesizing a lot of muscle not because they're lifting weights because they're because testosterone's making it happen yeah absolutely but let's say you're not let's say you know you're just you know just schlump the the street like uh you know joeo okay and you eat that Porter House you've taken on all these amino acids there's no place to store it other than muscle so your liver takes the excess and deamidates that amino acid takes the amino group off to turn it from a amino acid into an organic acid and then that organic acid can then enter the kreb cycle the tricarboxylic acid cycle what goes on in the mitochondria in order to generate ATP the chemical energy that your body needs in order to power itself okay now that's a good thing it takes double the amount of energy to prepare that amino acid for burning as it does to uh prepare a carbohydrate for burning or fat because when I asked about when you asked about almonds why the the 160 versus 130 I thought it was the processing it turned out it was fiber you're saying for protein let's it let's make it realistic for a a really nice big porterhouse steak which I love by the way let's say let's say 800 calories yeah well it turns how how much of that is is uh so that's what goes in your mouth right my mouth right how much of it is actually um eaten in uh to stay with the your calorie eaten is not a calorie eaten in the processing of that what percentages actually goes into your total caloric intake right so about 10% of everything you eat goes to just maintaining body temperature it's called the thermic effect of food but when you're eating protein you actually generate more Heat and the reason is because it takes to ATP to phosphorate that organic acid as opposed to one ATP to uh phosphorate that carbohydrate for uh consumption so you actually have a net loss of energy because it was a an amino acid versus a monosaccharide a sugar now you you brought up fat fat doesn't need to be phosphorilated so it actually doesn't have any um thermic effective food at that point so depends on what it is as to whether or not you have loss okay so but in this um let's make it actually realistic a 1600 calorie uh Porter House with a nice slab of of uh of grass-fed butter on there I do this every once in a while not not often with some cream spinach and maybe some mushrooms along the side honestly I say when I'm eating a porter house I don't want to adulterate The Taste okay with anything else except maybe some some butter maybe a salad okay afterwards but but let's say 1600 calories of of it's got some fat in there for sure uh let's say um uh a thousand of those calories is protein mhm the other 600 are fat something like that something like that depending on how marbled it is okay so based on what you just said about the thermic effect of food and protein in particular of that thousand calories how much actually is can we count I'm not a calorie counter but does one include as calories truly ingested well if you ingested 1600 well that's what went in the mouth but but but what is is going to go against your your uh burn deficit right so I would have to actually do the math to figure that out but as a guess yeah back of the envelope back of the envelope calculation you're going to lose about 25% of that wow so we're talking 750 calories yeah you know so and to translate this a bit so what we're saying here is if you're somebody who is trying to lose weight or maintain weight or perhaps even gain weight you eat a 1 1600 calorie Porter House with a slab of butter on it 600 of those calories we're saying in this instance is fat of the remaining thousand calories that's that all in your mouth so you count it at your mouth right but 700 but then when you compare it against your energy burn for that day to maintain temperature brain activity physical activity really it's only 750 calories that's right that's a huge difference exactly and another reason why a calorie is not a calorie now let's take the third let's take fats so over here we have omega-3s heart healthy anti-inflammatory anti-alzheimer's save your life and over here we have trans fats the devil incarnate consumable poison because you can't break the trans double bond you don't have the desaturates to break that trans double bond so it basically accumulates lines your arteries lines your liver causes chronic metabolic disease causes insulin resistance Omega-3s don't even get broken down for energy because they're so important they stay intact because your brain needs them your heart needs them whereas trans fats can't be broken down because of that trans double bond one save your life other one kill you they're both nine calories per gram if you explode them in a bomb calorimeter because a calorie burned is a calorie burned but a calorie eaten is not a calorie eaten because one will save your life one will kill you and finally the Big Kahuna the one that blows everything else out of the water fructose and glucose all right now glucose is the energy Al life so here we're talking carbohydrates I think most of our audience will be familiar with the so-called macronutrients so we talked about fat in this case almonds there's some Fiber in there probably a little bit of carbohydrate a little bit little bit talked about the Porter House with butter right making me hungry already that's protein and fat MH very little of any carbohydrate it should be zero essentially maybe one zero zero yep um and then now we're talking about carbohydrates and we're going to subdivide that into glucose and fructose right galactose basically becomes glucose in the liver so we we can dispense with that unless you have a disease called galactosemia which is about one in 20,000 um and causes neonatal menitis and you know it's a disease as a pediatric endocrinologist I would take care of but we can dispense with that for the moment all right so glucose fructose glucose is the energy of life every cell on the planet Burns glucose for energy glucose is so damn important that if you don't consume it your body makes it so it will take an amino acid and turn it into glucose that's gluconeogenesis glucogenesis that's right it will take a fatty acid and turn it into glucose and specifically the glycerol portion of the uh triglyceride will turn into glucose so the Inuit they didn't have any place to grow carbohydrate they had ice they had whale blubber they still have serum glucose level and the reason is because because you had to you have to have a serum glucose level in order to power your brain in order to power your heart yes you you can use ketones of course you can but you know only if you're in a ketogenic state will you use exclusively ketones and you also need glucose for structural changes in specific proteins and particularly hormones so glucose molecules will stud TSH la FSH different pituitary hormones in order to increase their potency it's one of the reasons why aging leads to defective hormonogenesis for instance hypogonadism hypothyroidism is the loss of glycosilation on individual um uh uh peptide hormones because of uh the inability to add glucose because of insulin insens just it's an aging phenomenon okay we'll come come back to this because I think it's really important yeah the idea that ingestion of carbohydrates and the as you called it the studying of carbohydrate molecules on hormones can augment the function of those hormones and with aging that's a less efficient process a less efficient process but it's not because of consumption it's right people are still I I see the the uh plenty of folks who are uh 65 and older eating plenty of carbohydrates you're saying a lot of them have defic thyroid testosterone estrogen um prolactin Etc because of the way that those carbohydrates are not studing the uh the hormones exactly so they're all of those are glycoprotein hormones let's tea that up for later because I think that's an interesting Avenue to go down okay and there's a and there's a disease in children in in babies called congenital disorders of glycosilation where you can't put uh uh glucose Mo uh molecules on specific proteins and it causes severe mental retardation all sorts of metabolic havoc and a lot of those babies die for that matter so that's an important thing all right but that's how important glucose is fructose on the other hand this sweet molecule the molecule we seek the reason why the food industry studs every food in the grocery store you 73% of all items in the American Grocery Store have added sugar on purpose for the food industry's purposes not for yours because fructose is addictive activates the nucleus accumbens the reward center of the brain in the same way that cocaine heroin nicotine alcohol do and drives dopamine receptors down just like nicotine you know alcohol you know cocaine heroin do that molecule fructose is number one uh completely sigil to all vertebrate life there is no biochemical reaction in any vertebrate that requires dietary fructose that's number one number two okay so sorry I'm going to just answer so you're saying that even though we can process fructose we have a limited capacity to process it in the same way we have a limited capacity to metabolize alcohol now if you have one drink a day yeah you're okay if you have two drinks a day depends on how big you are you know you and I can probably I would argue two drinks a week is the maximum but but let's not go there the um but but in terms of you're saying when you say fructose processing a fructose is vestigal what you're saying is that we don't need to do it it's like the appendix it's an organ for which it has no function exactly and fructose has no function in the human body period you don't need it you don't need it don't need it but our diet is replete with it in fact our fructose consumption has gone up 25 fold since the beginning of the last century I have to ask this now I love fruit I eat berries Galore especially since the price of berries seems to have come down it used to be that you only get them certain times of year I'm what you call a drive by blueberry eater so I'll just walk past and just take a fistful you can't put them in front of me without me eating them this is even difficult for me when other people I don't know are eating them so um I eat lots of blueberri strawberries blackberries if they're in season I love them no problem loaded with fructose no plenty of fiber low fructose low fructose and berries berries are the lowest fructose of all the so worried about asking you this today thank you okay um and fruit is okay because of the fiber so the molecule the fructose molecule is the same whether it's in a berry or in a banana or for that matter in a Coca-Cola the fructose molecule is the same molecule the difference is that in the berry it comes with a whole lot of fiber in the banana comes with a whole lot less fiber and in the Coca-Cola it doesn't come with any fiber and the fiber is what mitigates the absorption so when you consume the fructose with fiber so your blueberries you're feeding your microbiome that fructose wasn't for you got it such a relief and um I I must say recently I had a whole body MRI as a preemptive thing uh someone that it was it was great I got to watch a Netflix in there and um I never had a whole body MRI I learned a few things that were useful to me I've got a clean bill of health so that's great one of the pie the feedback I got is um that my gut was filled with this very high contrast um stuff right and they asked you know do you consume a lot of blueberries and I said indeed I do why and they said um because that high contrast stuff it shows up white on the scan is um high concentrations of magnesium um that we see in people that ingest large amounts of blueberries which is pretty rare and yours are comparable to a bear in blueberry season wow um and basically my entire gut was filled with with blueberries I suppose I need to cut back a little bit but now I know that fruit is okay especially if the fruit has a lot of fiber yeah but fructose itself especially if it's not partnered with fiber yeah is first of all not required for survival at all but you're telling me is uh problematic yeah and let me tell you why it's problematic we haven't gotten to that yet we're just talking about whether it's vestigal versus needed now let's talk about what fructose does turns out fructose inhibits three count them three separate enzymes necessary for normal mitochondrial function now your mitochondria make at TP your mitochondria have to work at Peak efficiency that's what metabolic health is is mitochondria working at Peak efficiency well there are three enzymes that are inhibited by fructose number one amyas all right now amp kinas is the fuel gauge on the liver cell it's the thing that tells the liver to make more mitochondria fresher mitochondria because if your am levels are high that means you've phosphorated a bunch of atps and you have to regenerate them so you need some more mitochondria so it's a negative feedback pathway well you need that amp kyes to generate that mitochondrial biogenesis signal except that fructose a metaboli of fructose called methylglyoxal MGO sits in the active site of the gamma subunit of that amp kinas and actually binds to arginines in that active site rendering that uh um enzyme now dead it's an irreversible inhibition because of the Cove valent bonding of that methylglyoxal that alahh to the Arginine and now that enzyme is dead Okay so it basically acts like a key that doesn't turn the lock but prevents the the key that you want in that lock from entering the the lock it's like it's like gluing a lock shut yeah got it all right so that's one of the enzymes that's one okay second one aad L asil COA dehydrogenase longchain so this is necessary to cleave two carbon fragments of fatty acids to prepare them for uh uh metabolism so it inhibits that one and then finally it inhibits carnitine pidal transferase one now cpt1 now that's the enzyme that regenerates carnitine carnitine is the shuttle mechanism by which you get the uh fatty acids from the outer mitochondrial membrane through to the inner mitochondrial membrane so that they can be beta oxidized for energy so if you don't have that c uh cpt1 you're basically carnitin and therefore you can't generate um beta oxidation you said fructose inhibits all three of these enzymatic Pathways y as a biologist I have to ask you know how potently does it inhibit them I mean because there's there are drugs that block receptors and then there are drugs that block receptors with in unbelievable Affinity so you know I mean mechanistically in a dish meaning in vitro you can see all sorts of things but how how significant is this for like for obesity for mitochondrial function in Vivo in us all right so look you know the the dose determines the poison right paracelsus 1537 um there are toxins that are parts per billion and will kill you like sarin rysen Cyanide by the way cyanide is a good analogy because it's working on mitochondria it's basically causing mitochondria to be completely defective all right then there are um intermediate toxins like Arsenic and carbon tetrachloride parts per million and they take a little longer to work they're not going to kill you on the spot that's why I can eat an apple seed that has a little bit of arsenic in it but I'm not going to die right and then finally there and by the tobacco smoke goes in there and then finally you have um uh weak toxins all right and you know where it's not one exposure that will kill you it's you know 10,000 exposures that'll kill you like alcohol or toxic people yeah or toxic wellx couldn't resist sorry sometimes it don't mildly toxic people anyway the point is that fructose is in that last category so it's not what you do one day that kills you it's what you do every day that k kills you and if you basically eat Ultra processed food high in sugar for 10 years in a row it's going to show up in terms of your comorbidities and ultimately yeah it will kill you and we have the data to show you know how many years you will lose so right now in America we pay an 8ye longevity tax if you look at Japan who uh they have a mean age of death of 88 we have a mean age of 80 okay we're paying an 8-year longevity tax just by living here and we're talking about the healthy people now if you have metabolic syndrome it's a 15-year longevity tax and uh sorry if you have obesity it's a 15-year longevity taxt and if you have metabolic syndrome it's a 20-year longevity taxt that is primarily not completely but primarily sugar it's also you know Omega sixes it's also so trans fats you know left over because now they're gone but you know people are still suffering the ravages of the trans fats you know from the previous generation are they gone I mean I do remember as a kid when we had margarine in our refrigerator this is actually a big debate in my home one parent I won't identify which um was Pro margarine the other was Pro butter anti margarine right um the marriage didn't last but there were other reasons that's probably why I went butter um butter butter is fine in fact time declared you know a front cover Butters back you know um margarine was the bad guy without question U and we know now but you know back when we thought it was a calorie was a calorie we thought oh margarine you know it's the same you know nine calories per gram and we said it lowers your triglycerides bad idea it was because what it did was it lined your liver because you couldn't break that trans double bond and um you know so they're they're now gone from our uh food supply they're illegal they're illegal they're banned but you can make trans fats in your own kitchen by taking olive oil and heating it to beyond the smoking point so they're not completely gone they're just gone from Ultra process food so now sugar is the big problem because of these three enzymes that you are inhibiting the point is we were we started this with a calorie is a calorie well if you are inhibiting mitochondrial function then a calorie is not a calorie is it you're reducing the um intensity of the Furnace yeah exactly so this whole calories of calorie just makes no sense and it hasn't worked at any level and there is no study that actually shows that cutting calories makes a difference and I can show you you know voluminous data that shows that virtually every way loss study that CA that led to you know caloric restriction basically didn't work not for any length of time just a round out our earlier discussion because I find it fascinating and I know other people will as well talked about that 160 calories that's actually 130 at the business end of things uh of almonds we talked about the Porter House steak with butter and the 25% reduction in what's actually quote unquote eaten and I'll get back to this because this quote unquote issue I think the problem is there's there's a lack of useful language to dissociate this stuff yeah you know even just calling fat fat people think it it's going to make you gain body fat totally if we called it adapost tissue and lipids we would have avoided this confusion so I I don't want to get there just yet but I I want to make sure with the food industry does this on purpose really you oh absolutely so they tell you a sugar is a sugar which is not true they tell you a calorie is a calorie which is not true and they tell you a fat is a fat which is not true okay this is very specifically so when you're talking about sugar you talking about dietary sugar or you talking about blood sugar because blood sugar is blood glucose use dietary cholesterol or circulating cholesterol or you know absolutely yeah okay so we we've done this um you know uh to ourselves but the food industry has really promulgated it because we farmed out nutrition policy and information to the food industry so they actually use this for their purposes it's one of the problems in this field as we all know quality nutrition influences of course our physical health but also our mental health and our cognitive functioning our memory our ability to learn new things and to focus and we know that one of the most important features of highquality nutrition is making sure that we get enough vitamins and minerals from highquality unprocessed or minimally processed sources as well as enough probiotics and prebiotics and fiber to support basically all the cell functions in our body including the gut microbiome now I like most everybody try to get optimal nutrition from Whole Foods ideally mostly from minimally processed or nonprocessed Foods however one of the challenges that I and so many other people face is getting enough servings of high quality fruits and vegetables per day as well as fiber and probiotics that often accompany those fruits and vegetables that's why way back in 2012 long before I ever had a podcast I started drinking ag1 and so I'm delighted that ag1 is sponsoring the huberman Lab podcast the reason I started taking ag1 and the reason I still drink ag1 once or twice a day is that it provides all of my foundational nutritional needs that is it provides insurance that I get the proper amounts of those vitamins minerals probiotics and fiber to ensure optimal mental health physical health and performance if you'd like to try ag1 you can go to drink a1.com huberman to claim a special offer they're giving away five free travel packs plus a year supply of V Vin D3 K2 again that's drink a1.com huberman to claim that special offer for the third category of macronutrients carbohydrates you differentiated um glucose and fructose MH if I ingest um let's say a half a bagel um since we were talking about New York your city of origin they have great Bagels on the west coast yeah I know it's not the same it's pretty pitiful same with the pizza dough it's like they claim it's the the the water whatever it is it's different back there and it's better indeed half a bagel let's say 250 calories mostly carbohydrate mhm this is an an unlined un no cream cheese no shmear as they call back there no no cream cheese no butter none that thing just half a bagel 250 calories so that's what I ate you're saying that a calorie eaten is not a calorie eaten how much of that carbohydrate given that it's probably most let's assume it's mostly glucose let's do it this way yeah it is it's polymerized glucose okay polymerized glucose how much of that is actually utilized or burned versus um you know the the original 250 so if you look at what happens to energy in the body 65% of that which is ingested goes to resting energy expenditure just to power the body 10% goes to the thermic effect of food and then 25% goes to activity that's the breakdown of where the uh energy goes and that's calories from fat protein and carbohydrates yeah from everything together and you know glucose is a perfectly good example of how that works the point is though that when you ingest glucose you're getting a big glucose Excursion in your bloodstream so you're getting a big glucose Spike and that glucose Spike has to come down well what makes it come down the hormone insulin insulin is the bad guy in the story The higher your glucose goes the more your pancreas will release insulin in order to bring that glucose down Well turns out that glucose rise was not benign that glucose rise led to endothelial dysfunction transient but nonetheless endothelial dysfunction could you just um remind people what endothelial cells are the inside of your arteries okay and it will change blood pressure we've got plenty of data to demonstrate how it changes blood pressure and over time that will cause coronary artery disease that will cause kidney disease Etc but it's the insulin response that is really the bad guy now people think insulin is good because it lowers blood glucose after all diabetics take insulin you know to lower their blood glucose okay let's take a diabetic patient with diabetes blood sugar is 300 that's bad we give them a shot of insulin in the arm blood sugar goes down to 100 blood sugar went from 300 to 100 okay where did the 200 points of blood glucose go I'm assuming that the insulin was sequestered it to where I'm assuming to the liver to the fat interesting for storage that's insulin's job insulin takes whatever you're not burning and puts it into fat for storage insulin is not the diabetes hormone insulin is the energy storage hormone quickly does it do that because because if I'm you know having a a very busy day mhm or that diabetic person is having a very busy day and they're moving around a lot then you got insulin bound glucose in the bloodstream uh for how long no no insulin doesn't bind glucose insulin binds to its receptor sure sorry sorry and allows for glucose Transporters to work so so but for some period of time while that person is active There's an opportunity to utilize that glucose yeah right um so how quickly is insulin managing that glucose uh we know that the spike comes down quickly but the glucose is not available for energy utilization after what it's or it's it's sequestered to the the adapost to the fat tissue at within an hour is that about so about 90 minutes yeah but I mean if you're if you're if you're active if you eat uh you know a muffin and you're active Okay your muscles are going to take up that glucose irrespective of in insulin in fact muscles are insulin independent they have glucose Transporters but they are insulin independent because if they weren't then every patient in diabetic keto acidosis would be paralyzed okay so glucose will end up in muscles irrespective of energy status and uh insulin status and in muscles it's used as immediate Fuel and glycogen both okay metu and glycogen storage okay in the muscle absolutely all right now if you're active then you will clear glucose into muscle Therefore your blood glucose won't rise as much because it went into muscle and therefore your pancreas will put out less insulin because it doesn't have to clear as much from the bloodstream and that's okay that's good right but let's say you didn't exercise so you've got a big glucose Excursion now you have a big insulin response and that insulin is going to take the excess that's in your blood it has to clear it and it will go to fat for storage that insulin rise turns out to be particularly agrees in terms of metabolic disease and I can prove it there is a mouse my favorite Mouse I love this mouse this mouse turns medicine on its head and teaches every doctor why they have to go back to medical school and learn it right this mouse is called the paduro mouse p d RKO is it discovered by pedco no no it was uh discovered in ronon La it was manufactured in ronon lab so this is a tissue specific insulin receptor knockout Mouse Okay IR KO insul LAX insulin receptor in specific the kidney in the kidney interco glomular ptoy insulin receptor knockout mous we haven't talked too much about transgenic models and knockins and Knockouts so uh just in 10 seconds or less basically the these are mice that are genetically engineered to lack the receptor for insulin specifically in the glul poite the kidney in the in the kidney and everywhere else in this mouse insulin does its thing normally exactly great so these animals are ug glycemic normal blood glucose levels these animals are normally glucose tolerant they you know go up they go down just like every other Mouse these mice are not fat these mice are not thin these mice are mice except they have the worst diabetic nephropathy on the planet so they ner oh their kidney is degenerative their kidneys degenerate to nothing yikes now they have normal blood glucose levels they have normal glucose tolerance they have normal insulin tolerance whole body but their kidneys are dying how come can't be the glucose it's the insulin because insulin is the bad guy insulin's actually making the kidney disease and so these animals that are insulin resistant they have diabetic nephropathy without diabetes so the insulin is having a negative clearly negative effect on the kidneys without binding to the receptor exactly so circulating insulin can do stuff without binding to its receptor well it's no it binds to its receptor in different parts of the body other parts of the body in the kidney it can't because it's a knockout because it's knockout right the point is insulin does stuff by itself and it turns out insulin drives growth now every cell in your body wants to burn at one time in its life and wants to grow at another time in its life every cell has those two Pathways burning growth burning growth what determines whether a cell should be burning or whether a cell should be growing I don't know what makes it um burning but presumably it's in the has something to do with mitochondria it has everything to do with mitochondria right so every cell needs to burn and needs to grow at a different time in its life here's a way to think about it we all start out as a zygote a single cell we end up an adult now that single cell had to become two cells those two cells had to become four cells those four cells had to become eight cells and on and on and on and on so every cycle there's a doubling how many doublings to get from a zygote to an adult what's an exponential growth so yeah I don't I don't know it off the top of my head 41 41 41 two to the 41 doublings gives you an organism 10 trillion cells we're 10 trillion cells we're 10 trillion cells do we know that yeah okay two to the 41 okay okay now of those 41 doublings some of them had to occur in utero some of them had to occur postnatally so I need two numbers that add up to 41 how many in utero how many postnatally well way more you start off with a lot more than you end up with but then you have cells that turn over throughout the lifespan so this is a tough one okay because skin cells turn over I with neurons it's it's pretty straightforward because you're going to somewhere between three and 10 right well you're and you're born with somewhere between 3 and 10x of what you end up with depending on the brain structure yeah so but whole body wide I don't know how you'd come up put that number 36 and five okay 36 doublings prenatally five doublings postnatally and I can prove that to you too typical baby weighs s pounds first doubling 14 pounds second doubling 20 uh 8B next doubling 56 lb next doubling 112 lb next doubling 224b that's hopefully it's top obes individ hopefully it's tops there not not all people 212 lbs are obese um but some people who are of certain Heights or below are 212 aerobes okay point is the cell has to know when to grow and when to burn it turns out that the signal for that is oxygen because oxygen is necessary for mitochondria to be able to burn in the absence of oxygen the cell only knows how to grow this is actually why OT warberg won the Nobel Prize in 1931 for the war effect he asked the question how come cancer cells don't need oxygen to grow and the answer is cuz no cell needs oxygen to grow in fact oxygen is the thing that prevents growth famous article from the New England Journal of Medicine 1951 Mount Everest in utero because every fetus is oxygen deprived so normal partial pressure of oxygen 100 millimeters of mercury out here right if if I checked your blood it'd be about 100 right I hope so how about a tumor cell um guessing tumor cell is probably is it double about 44 wait you just told me partial pressure of of oxygen in a tumor cell it's about 44 but you just told me that well tumor cells which grow like wild right they grow like wild because they don't have oxygen but they but there are some of the so here's what's peculiar about it um tumor cells are some of the most vascularized cells or tumors are are heavily vascular I mean I mean one way to one way to try and kill one is to to devascularize the tumor cell yes and and you know angiogenesis inhibition Etc you know it's a big deal you know Judah folman and all that from Harvard you know so the excess blood to a tumor is the attempt to bring in oxygen that it's not getting that's right as opposed to delivering lots of oxygen in that's why it's growing that's right okay but a fetus what's the partial pressure in the placenta I don't know 6 to 31 so it's actually like a mile above Mount Everest that's how much oxygen the fetus gets and it's that for that reason that you've got 36 doublings and then as soon as you're out you know then you cut the cord and you start breathing and now your partial pressure is at 100 that's when growth slows down has there been any effort to treat tumors by oxygenating tumors yes and what does that look like it's hyperbaric oxygen therapy it's a thing oh yeah yeah yeah we we'll probably do an episode on hyperbaric chambers it's the the the reason we haven't yet is it's pretty niche in but there are people who own these things who sit in these things um okay so we got here by way of by way of car by The Bagel right um so I just want to orient us um that you just that 250 calories of the The Bagel we talked about glucose excursions but it's that insulin rise that's driving the atopos it's also driving the growth okay in the absence of oxygen because if you have oxygen then you don't need that much insulin okay so because you're going to burn instead of store got it in terms of the the uh the raw metabolism of carbohydrate though that glucose if I eat 250 calories of glucose how much of that did I quote unquote actually eat how much is is used how much is used yeah let's assume that I'm I'm at my desk working or I'm walking around a little bit I'm not I'm not exercising hard in the in the subsequent hour so used for what is the question I'm getting back to the calorie is is the calorie a calorie clearly the answer is no but based on the processing of different types of calories we established it for fat the almonds we established it for protein right the Porter House with butter and now we're we're trying to establish that for the 250 calories of of bagel which is glucose right so the glucose has to be phosphorated so you're going to lose uh an ATP in the process so you're going to go ATP goes to ADP and then that ADP will go to a denzine monophosphate which will then go to im an ocol monophosphate which will then go to Uric acidd okay and that uric acid will be then released from the cell circulate in the blood and hopefully go out in the kidney in the process that uric acid can inhibit mitochondrial function and it can also inhibit endothelial nitric oxide synthese which is the enzyme in your vasculature that is your endogenous blood pressure lowerer right by expanding blood vessels and capillaries exactly right this is the mechanistic uh foundation of the drugs that were originally used for uh improving prostate function but are used to treat itile dysfunction which are the the PD Inhibitors which allow nitric oxide to be uh around longer and more of it right people use it for other purposes too now no one will forget if I queue it up with that that example well we we uh you know in the neonatal Intensive Care Unit it closes Paton ductus arteriosis which is a big deal in uh in the uh neonatal uh uh World okay I I want to ask you about that but but um so I heard two things one is that um glucose and the insulin that goes with it increases uric acid mhm uric acid uh while it has certain important functions in health too much of it you said Can inhibit nitric oxide yeah can inhibit nitric oxide so that means that the blood vessels and capillaries are going to stay more constricted so blood pressure is going to be higher than it would be normally that's right and then uric acid is also inhibiting mitochondrial function that's right okay um but eating half a bagel isn't necessarily a terrible thing if it's within your caloric requirements it and it it all depends on how much uh you clear and how high your insulin goes now let's compare that 250 calories of glucose to 250 calories of fructose right uh let's let's come up with a food example 250 calories of fructose would be trivial to uh consume in the form of high fructose corn syrup right so remember that high fructose corn syrup is half glucose half fructose 125 125 so let's use that well so let's assume um so we talk about a soda for uh to get that that uh 250 calories easily right um especially if it's not a can or a European siiz bottle or can 8 o 8 O can of soda okay so 8 oz can of soda um and maybe let's include a food item let's talk like a store-bought packaged cookie couple Oreos two Oreos okay probably get you to that 250 or maybe four Oreos maybe three Oreos yeah okay um Oreo lovers everywhere celebrating three 250 calories of fructose what's the effect on uric acid what's the effect on caloric burn what's the effect on anything for that matter that uh we should be aware of all right so first of all the Oreo has plenty of fructose in it so keep that in mind okay the um if let's say you consumed uh 250 calories in a bagel because that's pretty much polymerized glucose versus say the soda so the bagel versus the soda that's what you're equivalent calories right equivalent Cal or the The Bagel versus let's say two Oreos and a little bit of um and yeah two Oreos okay so number one there's only half the glucose in the soda because the other half is the fructose it's 125 125 so you're glucose rise won't be as high your glucose Excursion will be lower this is actually one of the reasons why there's this thing called glycemic index glycemic index is a Canard it's garbage it is complete and utter BS the glycemic index absolute BS nothing nothing is more um uh egregious in terms of uh argument than than than the glycemic index and this is one of the things dietitians promote and espouse and one of the things that's got to go this this is an idea that must die okay we'll get back to why the gmic index has got to die uh but so so that 250 calories and actually can we can we make these equal just for sake of of Simplicity can we say 250 calories of glucose from The Bagel versus 250 calories of fructose how do we get 250 calories of pure fructose we don't you can't okay you got to bring the glucose with lab Lab fructose you have to make it the Oreos which is half glucose half fructose right I mean there is no fructose alone in nature even crackers some of the ones that are salty are also sweet they have fructose in them high fructose purp yeah that's why it's impossible to eat just one indeed um so what's happening biochemically as a consequence of the fructose component specifically so the fructose will first of all go into the intestine the intestine will metabolize some of that fructose through what is known as intestinal denova lipogenesis about 10% of that fructose will be turned into fat right in the intestine and that's because fructose it just wants to be fat yeah fructose wants to be fat fructose is the lipogenic substrate here we're not talking about body fat we're talking about fat molecules that can potentially be used as energy that's right triglyceride molecules okay so so 10% of that fructose will be turned into triglyceride right in the intestine and be released into the bloodstream and it is the reason for a post prandial triglyceride response post prandial is uh and I'm including myself in this group is nerd speak for after eating lunch typically it's lunch so that's actually one of the drivers of cardiovascular pathology that intestinal denova lipogenesis turning that fructose into triglyceride right in the intestine now there's a limit to how fast and how much the intestine can do that the rest of the fructose will be uh absorbed into the portal vein but not before some of that fructose will make it further down and it will nitrate tight Junction proteins now okay portal vein of the kidney portal vein goes to the liver portal vein goes from the visceral from the intestine to the liver no kid it doesn't feed the kidney okay no kidney intestine to liver okay okay but fructose nitrates tight Junction proteins now let me explain that to your audience your intestine is a sewer definition of a sewer a pipe with in it okay that's a sewer our intestines are sewers there's junk in the center and the job of the intestine is to move the junk through to the anus absorbing the good stuff while you can the intestine is made up of cells intestinal epithelial cells that are bound together and they're bound with proteins that basically form a barrier those barriers are called tight Junction proteins things like cloudin and things like that um zulin is the main one okay there are others but zulin is the one that goes is defective in the celiac disease what defines a tight Junction is it is like completely impermeable or semi-permeable completely impermeable okay unless its function is inhibited turns out if you alter the um uh phosphorilation status or the nitrate status of that tight Junction it will become transiently permeable okay and so fructose nitrates tight Junction proteins causing them to be transiently permeable allowing some of the junk in your intestine to get through into your bloodstream so this is leaky gut this is leaky gut this is what causes leaky gut fructose is a driver of leaky gut got it that causes inflammation at the level of the liver which ultimately leads to systemic inflammation one of the reasons why High sensitive CRP sensitivity CRP is high in patients who eat ultr processed food CRP is C reactive protein which is a marker of a essentially an inflammatory immune response exactly yeah you don't want it too high and 93% of Americans today are inflamed does that mean that 93% of Americans have leaky guts yeah it does because that's where it comes from so in addition to limiting fructose intake mhm what are things that um support the tight junctions of of the intestinal pathway so there are three barriers in your intestine to keep the junk where it belongs in the center so that it can get pooped out the your behind all right three separate barriers one is a physical barrier called the muin layer so it's a layer of mucus that actually sits on top of the intestinal epithelial cells now that m muin is a polysaccharide and the bacteria can use that mucin layer for its own purposes it will eat your mucin layer if you don't feed your bacteria you must feed your bacteria or your bacteria will feed on you okay so you are in concert with your microbiome if you deprive your microbiome of the food that it needs it will use you as its food and that's one of the reasons why fiber is so important so fiber to build up this muin layer is one way to reinforce the the uh the fence that that is the tight junctions Etc exct um between your intestine and the bloodstream exactly this raises an interesting point about fasting many people including myself do a sort of pseudo intermittent fasting I eat my first meal somewhere between 11: and noon I'm not strict about this the 11 versus noon thing and probably eat my last bite of food somewhere around 800 p.m and occasionally it's outside that window I've done this for a long time it just feels best to me right other people use a shorter eating window one thing that I learned from a colleague at Yale who studies the gut microbiome that was surprising to me is that when you do when you eat in that way there's a long stretch of time sometimes longer for people that have a shorter eating window longer fasting what know that is yeah where you're actually eating up your own intestinal lining so this idea that fasting is so great for us on the one hand might be true on the other hand you're you're actually consuming components of your you're not not feeding your gut microbiome and you deplete it but then here's where I was positively surprised when you do eat provided that you eat enough fiber and in particular high quality fermented foods low sugar fermented foods it seems that the the lining of the gut and the gut microbiome is replenished to a level that is greater than if you had eaten for longer periods of the 24-hour cycle do I have that right we do you do have it right and I don't know why that is true but it does seem to be the case and fermented foods B in part because they've got already short chain fatty acids in them um seem is that the preferred food of the microbiome well it's what the microbiome actually turns fiber into so it's probably helping your intestinal epithelial cells in the same way what the microbiome turning fiber into short chain fatty acids helps so it's what we call a postbiotic so you have Prebiotic which is the food for the bacteria you have the probiotic which is the bacteria itself and you the postbiotic which is what the bacteria make in order to heal you okay and so short chain fatty acids are postbiotics and there are a lot of people selling short chain fatty acids you know drinks and supplements and what have you whether they work or not is another story if I consume fructose in the uh form of let's say a highly processed food has minimal antioxidants but it's got plenty of calories typically uh and it's disrupting the tight junctions making my gut leaky right but I'm also eating fiber yeah you know I'm having a you know a meal that includes a salad I'm having having some probiotics and then I want like a couple rees's peanut butter cups like in the dark chocolate ones in particular I don't do this anymore but I used to eat like that more often as as time has gone on I've I've become I don't like to call it stricter but more I I I tend to like healthier foods over time and I think you can get away with different things at different stages of Life although you work with young people so uh we'll get to very young people so we'll get to this but how how much damage am I doing by ingesting any fructose in the form of a highly processed food so I'll make it very simple Andrew I am for dessert for dessert I am not for dessert for breakfast lunch snacks and dinner okay so if you want to have a couple of ree's peanut butter cups as your dessert in the same way as you might have a conac for dessert that's fine I have no problem with that the question is are you going to eat re's peanut butter cuffs for breakfast no I don't eat breakfast but no I got but I see your point the National School breakfast program which 29% of school children today consume is a bowl of Froot Loops and a glass of orange juice that is 41 gam of sugar American Heart Association says that the upper limit for children should be 12 gram of added sugar per day that's 41 grams of added sugar and it's just breakfast and that's fructose Rich totally completely so the question is which dessert are we talking about and right and can we can we adjust that morning meal um to a different reality cuz I agree that there are plenty of kids eating that or a muffin that might be the equivalent um but what about the parent who's has okay let's come up with a healthier option that the kid still likes like uh I'm thinking back to my childhood like a honeynut Cheerios or something so not Froot Loops which is kind of the extreme um take a look at the side of the package no difference and now let's say they go with um some uh like waffles that are made so with a with a pre-made U mix some milk some butter um you know so mom or dad is making waffles great it sounds healthier but then if you do the breakdown are we're still ending up at very high are we basically eating dessert for breakfast are we eating ego waffles or we uh making waffles uh denovo you know from scratch in your own kitchen let's say big difference okay because the ego waffles you know replete with sugar on purpose because the food industry knows when they add it you buy more because it's addictive okay and we actually have the um uh uh demographic the mechanistic the Imaging and also the economic data to demonstrate that Sugar's addictive and the food industry knows it so have you ever heard of a phenomenon called price elasticity okay price elasticity is an economic term that is used to ask the question if the price of a given good goes up by 1% that should result in reduction in purchase or consumption because price influences consumption how much does it influence it so if it's if something's price elastic when the price goes up consumption goes down equivalently a food that is price elastic the most price elastic food is eggs so when the price of eggs goes up 1% consumption of eggs goes down. 68% meaning that eggs have a price elasticity of. 32 got it got it now what's the most priced in elastic food the top three most price in elastic foods are fast food cereal1 I like a good quiz fast food 081 um uh uh soft drinks at 79 9 and juice at 77 meaning people will pay not whatever but they'll they're willing to pay more more more readily willing to pay more because of the sugar because it's addictive because it's honic so many many years ago Andrew you probably remember something called Keynesian economics and Keynesian economics was based on this concept of the rational actor and the rational actor can determine value which is utility over cost and if you're a rational actor you should be able to say yeah I'll buy that but I won't buy that right okay in 1979 Daniel canaman and Amos tki Nobel Prize winner uh Daniel canaman described the irrational actor now the irrational actor cannot determine value and the reason is because he is risk averse so the cost is always too great so the utility may be the same but the cost goes up because that's why they have you know aversive Tendencies the irrational actor Jeffrey Sachs has described the honic actor who also cannot determine value because it doesn't matter what it costs they need their fix and this is what's going on and the food industry knows it and that's why every food in the store has been spiked I'd like to take a quick break to acknowledge our sponsor element element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't that means zero sugar and the appropriate ratios of the electrolytes sodium magnesium and potassium and that correct ratio of electrolytes is extremely important because every cell in your body but especially your nerve cells your neurons relies on electrolytes in order to function properly so when you're well hydrated and you have the appropriate amount of electrolytes your system your mental functioning and your physical functioning is improved I drink one packet of element dissolved in about 16 to 32 ounces of water when I wake up in the morning as well as while I exercise and if I've sweat a lot during that exercise I often will drink a third element packet dissolved in about 32 ounces of water after I exercise element comes in a variety of different flavors all of which I find really tasty I like the Citrus I like the watermelon I like the raspberry frankly I can't pick just one it also comes in chocolate and chocolate mint which I find tastes best if they are put into water dissolved and then heated up I tend to do that in the winter months because of course you don't just need hydration on hot days and in the summer and spring months but also in the winter when the temperatures are cold and the environment tends to be dry if you'd like to try element you can go to drink element spelled lm.com huberman to try a free sample pack again that's drink element.com huberman we talked about dessert for breakfast in the form of cereals some of which are um disguised or couched as healthier you know I think of like Honey Nut Cheerios it seems healthier than Froot Loops it looks healthier like the just by way of color it looks kind of weedy you know color so but let and in terms of lunch I mean one of the things that I love about Europe is that the breads are amazing yeah breads are terrific there and I like them because they're not as sweet exactly and so a sandwich from not every Deli but from a typical sandwich Shopper that one makes with store bread sliced bread in the US has a lot of fructose I looked I looked this up prior to to our discussion today so in some ways dessert is being woven into foods that are that parents Andor kids everyone thinks are Savory are we're actually eating sweets exactly right but we can't but we don't taste them as sweet at a conscious level necessarily right but our but our taste buds do right that's exactly right so the question is why do they do that so question for your audience you buy a loaf of bread at the local bakery how soon before it stales two days best yeah if it's really grape bread that's right the better the bread the quicker it stales you buy a loaf of bread at the uh Neighborhood Grocery Store how soon before it stals w you've got probably a week and then there's the moldy pieces at the end that you try you know if you're in college and you were me try and scrape that off um it can last up to 3 weeks depending right you could throw it in the freezer you probably do that with the bakery bread but it's never the same never the same it's never the same so the question is why is that and the answer is sugar the answer is sugar so the grocery store bread had sugar added to it on purpose because when you bake it the sugar does not evaporate it stays in the bread and the sugar is hygroscopic meaning it holds on to water is a phenomenon that the food industry uses called water activity okay and so it will hold on to water and so it will stay spongy and it will not stale as quickly as the bakery store bread which did not have that sugar added to it so even something as benign as bread has been turned into something that ultimately leads to Chronic metabolic disease we've pivoted somewhat from carbohydrate divided into GL glucose and fr ose to a discussion of sugar could you tell us the link between sugar and fructose so table sugar what percentage of table sugar is fructose what percentage of brown sugar is fructose what percentage of the sugar that's added to food is high fructose corn syrup on average you know just because here what we're talking about is um what you're describing as an intentional lacing of food with something that's addictive but that's also processed very differently at the level of the kidney at the level of the liver um right and it's bad it's a bad it's a bad situation so so when we talk about sugar I think we need to be as careful in describing what we really mean as when we talk about a calorie I completely agree so let for your audience let's be very very clear on definitions okay let's not use the word sugar because it has multiple definitions let's use sucrose sucrose is what you put in your coffee it's the crystals all right it's cane sugar Beach sugar you know the you know the stuff that teaspoons of right this was all that was available for many many years that is one molecule of glucose one molecule of fructose bound together uh for the chemists out there an Oly acidic linkage okay the enzyme in your intestine called sucra Cleaves this glycosidic linkage in about a nanc you absorb the two molecules separately the glucose goes to the entire body generates an insulin response the fructose goes straight to your liver generates fat that's sucrose high fructose corn syrup is essentially one molecule of glucose one molecule of fructose not bound together no o glycidic linkage so they're free the enzyme sucra doesn't care because the blond's already broken ultimately they do the same thing and that's why high fructose corn syrup and sucrose are indistinguishable metabolically what they are is they're very different economically and the reason is because high fructose corn servs half the price of sucrose because sucrose we get from import in and high fructose corn syrup we make it home sucrose is in bags high fructose corn syrup is in barrels sucrose you can sell at the store high fructose corn syrup you sell to the you know ultr processed food manufacturer you can't buy high fructose corn syrup at the uh you know at the grocery store so they're very different in terms of what they're used for high fructose corn syrup is particularly egregious because it's so missable because it's already a liquid so you've probably remember chipsahoy cookies in the old days okay they would often would seem like the sugar in the uh cookie had crystallized cu the sugar content was so high it's been a while since I've had one they weren't particularly good yeah now but you eat two of them and then you think they're good and then you want to eat four that's what's so odd the first bite is kind of like this and then it bombs away there you go well now it's a chewy Chips aoy cookies oh I remember the Reas chips are remember chewy Chips well that that's high fructose corn syrup because because the two molecules are free they don't crystallize so you can actually up the dose several times throughout today's discussion you've been talking about the quote unquote food industry mhm okay so I'm not a conspiracy theorist I am but now but I understand um you know that most businesses exist to make money yeah many businesses start off with good intentions and drift in order to stay um to stay competitive um and many many businesses as we know um not all of which are entirely bad such as the pharmaceutical industry right you they're bad they're instances of like the opioid crisis but then there are drugs from the pharmaceutical industry that help save lives I mean that's my my stance um the food industry I think they're good actors and there are Bad actors but we're talking about the food industry okay well we talk about the exercise industry we talk about the podcast industry I mean you got good actors and Bad actors but but what you've alluded to several times here and you're more informed than I am is a uh a concerted effort to lace food with a form of sugar that makes makes people crave more of that food and that is causing metabolic illness disrupting mitochondria and on and on exactly and you're the physician not me um you've worked with patients who struggle with obesity and for various reasons um not me and um so we could probably spend hours if not days talking about all the terrible things that the quot food industry is done but what do you think is the the pure motivation right I don't think that they want people to be sick but they want to sell product and this sells more product so then it raises two questions if why is it that more people don't know about know this information although many more will know after today's conversation but and certainly in government it's it's a mix regardless of what side of the aisle you're on or if you're right in between they're they're clearly people that care about the health of themselves and others so I can understand how things might have gotten to this point point but what do you think are the barriers to getting people to appreciate just what a problem this is and and getting people to change their choices in terms of what they're eating are they truly addicted to the point where they are sick they can't make good decisions like a like a drug addict who's highly addicted to heroin is a sick person they have an illness and they need treatment but until they get that treatment they can't make good decisions let's take an analogy alcohol 40% of Americans are tea totals never touch the stuff 40% don't drink 40% don't drink great I'm not a big fan of alcohol I've never seen it make anyone better at anything that really mattered no because except drinking completely vestigal there's no uh biochemical reaction in the body that requires alcohol okay for the same reason by the way fructose um 40% are social drinkers you know you can pick up a beer put it down I'm in that category 10% are binge Drinkers and 10% are chronic alcoholics okay now do you deprive the 40% of social drinkers because of the 20% of binge Drinkers and chronic alcoholics well I believe people should be in choice but I believe people should know what they are doing so that they can be in Choice well right like do as you I always say uh and I said this about the alcohol episode which turned out to be one of our most prolific episodes where I said you know more than two drinks zero is better than any and more than two drinks per week you need to do other things to offset that and it's problematic that's what those are what the data say but I but I would say do as you want but know what you're doing well so I would say that that's exactly what the food industry wants you to think that's that is the food industry's Mantra is you have your own choice personal responsibility so the question is does personal responsibility work and the answer is no it doesn't every uh Public Health debacle in the history of mankind started out as a personal health issue before it became a Public Health crisis and you can pick your uh you know personal responsibility issue whether it be exposures whether it be addictions whether it be infections bottom line is ultimately it required a societal response okay we can talk about syphilis we can talk about tuberculosis ultimately needed a public health response we can talk about um uh teen pregnancy we can talk about tobacco tobacco ultimately needs a public health response because the sheer enormity of it and the uh the egregiousness of it requires that public health response Well turns out this is no different in order to exercise personal responsibility four criteria have to to be met those four criteria are the following number one knowledge you have to have the knowledge because if you don't have the knowledge then how can you exercise personal responsibility well in fact the Public's being kept from the knowledge we're doing this now in part to in you know to entrain that knowledge to to get people to understand what the problem is yeah I mean I consider myself pretty informed about nutrition and health but already today I've learned learned two dozen facts about processing of fructose and calor calories generally that I had no knowledge of Prior well that's good okay because it's not about the math it's about the science okay they want it to be about calories so we have this thing called food science we have this thing called nutrition and we have this thing called metabolic Health they are not the same food science is what happens to food between the ground and the mouth nutrition is what happens to food between the mouth and the cell metabolic health is what happens to food inside the cell but all of the chronic diseases that we are suffering from type two diabetes hypertension dyslipidemia cardiovascular disease cancer dementia fatty liver disease polycystic ovarian disease those eight diseases which make up 75% of healthcare expenditures in this country today are all inside the cell because they are all mitochondrial dysfunction and there is no Med medicine that gets to the mitochondria although you and others at Stanford Harvard Etc are starting this with the metabolic Psychiatry being one instance righted and UCSF as well forgive me I should mentioned UCSF up front your your home institution wonderful institution right up the road from Stanford so you know things are changing people are starting to think about mitochondrial Health they are okay so you list off the first the first thing and you said there are four things that stand as be first one was knowledge okay second access because if you don't have access then how can you exercise personal responsibility access to healthier Alternatives exactly which means cost effective I mean I love berries from the farmers market more than I love berries from the store I love the farmers markets generally but it takes time energy to go there and the costs are actually lower at the level of what you hand the vendor typically right but uh volume is tough to achieve right they actually have me at a at a quota I'm not allowed to buy as many berries as I want because obviously there are other people who want berries so there's that right people have to feed their family that you know and they want we're used to eating a lot of volume but you're able to at least go there sometimes okay yeah we're talking about people who live in quote food deserts we're also talking about people who live in food swamps okay when we're talking about food swamps we're not talking about an plethora of healthy foods we're talking about all the junk that's what they they live in the swamp of junk so if you live in the swamp of junk how are you supposed to exercise personal responsibility number three uh or affordability so you have to be able to afford your choice and Society has to be able to afford your choice and right now we can't afford that choice because health care costs right now are at $4.1 trillion a year but like so many things in uh behavioral economics and health it's so hard for people to see that the the immediate choice is leading to a higher cost down the road there just too many nodes of separation for people to realize hey when I'm reaching for this cereal as opposed to making waffles for my kids from scratch or you know they're thinking time efficiency cost efficiency volume the kids not throwing Tantrums because they're not no longer getting the cereal and it's very difficult to see this is the reason why healthc care costs are going up there just too many nodes of Separation well couldn't agree more but the ultimately it's because the government separates and silos um food industry profits from health care costs if you actually combine those because they UL are the same you would see the problem so globally the food industry grosses $9 trillion a year health care costs globally cost 11 trillion a year dietary related healthcare costs Environmental costs cost $7 trillion a year and productivity costs cost $1 trillion a year so when you do the math 9 - 11 - 7 -1 means that there is a$1 trillion a year deficit because of us cleaning up the mess that the food industry makes and while numbers like that that's not affordable right I agree and while numbers like that land really hard I find that for myself and for many people statistics like that are hard to keep in mind in a way there's something about the human brain that hears that and goes whoa or like that war costs that much and this food issue costs that much and then we go to the store and we're hungry right and the kids are are are are hungry and and you're and so those nodes of Separation it's it's almost like a neural SL memory prefrontal cortex issue to me and of course I look at everything through the lens of neurobiology you know not everything but most everything and so how could I not how could we not but then like the issue is well there's still food on the shelves and you know and so it's very what do we do to connect to bring closer together these notes what would the government do question so the question is is there food on the shelves let me finish the fourth one and then I want to come back to that point let me just you know finish a concept so affordability and number four externalities your choice can't hurt anybody else but what if your choice does hurt somebody else so like for tobacco secondhand smoke right for alcohol drunk driving what was the argument for teen pregnancy that someone else was going to have to raise the kids exactly right but what about for food okay well how about the fact that your employer Stanford University has to pay $2,750 uh per year in obesity related health care expenses that they have passed on to you even though you're not obese that is affecting you so that guy's obesity right there that is affecting you ah but there nowadays it's especially tricky even to have the conversation I'm willing to have it now which is that you know there's this whole concept of fat shaming right so if somebody's obese whose fault is it and if we even talk about it is uh are we subject to um attack legitimate attack you know so like so calling something o someone obese at a clinical level like I mean you're an expert iny don't talk about obesity let's talk about diabetes okay so talk about the consequence of obesity yeah let's talk about the metabolic health issue itself okay the fact is that diabetes is now 11.4% of America what was it 20 years ago it was 20 years ago it was about about 8% I was wondering this earlier 20 years ago there was a lot more margarine in refrigerators but people were thinner and there was less diabetes everything you told us about margarine and trans fats is that it's bad bad bad now butter is back as Time Magazine and you said right so clearly can't be the transition away from trans fats that's increased obesity well no no so it's going to be the increase in Sugar Andre sugar and these hidden sugars in exactly that's right all right the the the the key though is is Pakistan and India because uh and China they are not fat but they have 14% diabetes rates and they're thin and the reason is because of ultra processed food are there any countries in the world that don't allow high fructose corn syrup or at least not at the level that that we do oh the fre loads okay there are boatloads of countries that uh don't import high fructose corn syrup or don't make so Scandinavian countries Scandinavian countries most of Europe um the other than the asia-pacific rim so uh Japan has it in fact it was invented in Japan 1966 Saga medical school takasaki at all um uh Korea has it um but Australia does not have it Thailand does not have it but they have just as much of an uh obesity and diabetes problem as we do because they have sucros because High fructus corn syp and sucr are no different metabolically so it doesn't really matter it's that one to one it's the one to one thing exactly of glucose and frose so here's the question Andrew okay so I want to go back to that you said all this food is still on the shelves is it food what is the definition of food can I give the definition I think most people would give that's not necessarily the one I would I would give but um something that has contains cic energy like I I could eat this microphone um but it's not going to provide much useful energy the definition of food straight from the dictionary and believe me I looked it up and memorized it I believe you substrate that contributes to either growth or burning of an organism interesting that is the definition of food I'm pretty scientific for 100% correct growth or burning so any substrate that passes your lips that contributes to either growth or burning that's food okay let's do it let's do burning first I just showed you that Sugar which is the marker of ultra processed food and 73% of the items in the grocery store are spiked with sugar inhibits burning it inhibits those three enzymes involved in mitochondrial function now let's do growth my colleague Dr arrat maneno Oran who is the chairman of nutrition at Hebrew University Jerusalem actually looked at this question and showed that ultrapress food actually inhibits growth it inhibits cortical bone growth it inhibits uh tricular bone growth it inhibits uh cancelous bone growth it inhibits linear bone growth it hijacks growth for cancer because it inhibits mitochondria and so you have to then grow instead of burn and this was work that was done in in Vivo or in vitro in Vivo inv Vivo so these are people that are eating high amounts of Highly processed food exactly how did he find those in in the in the Middle East they they found in Israel they found them so the bottom line is if a substrate does not contribute to growth and does not contribute to burning is it a food I the answer is no well that's 73% of what's in the grocery store so I would argue you said the food's there no it's not that's not food in fact it's consumable poison so this leads to an important question of what's left right you remove all that what's left um just anecdotally and what I sometimes call aneca um you know I've had several friends in their MH 40s and early 50s say they wanted to lose weight and get in shape and the the thing that's worked every every single time for them to lose significant amounts of weight quickly and keep it off and many of them were already exercising but then also increased their exercise was I just since I'm not a dietitian nutritionist or anything I just say eat meat fish eggs vegetables fruits you're not going to eat starches you're not going to drink alcohol you're not going to drink soda you can still have coffee tea you can still have artificial sweeteners I we'll go get to artificial sweeteners in a little bit we have to go there but um and the reason I say no starches even though I person personally eat rice oatmeal pasta things of that sort some in in moderation depending on on what sort of exercise and I'm doing and how much is because of the fact that nowadays many of those things contain fructose MH and inevitably every one of those people is blown away by the fact that it quote unquote works and assumes that it's all because of reduced calorie intake overall and they lose like anywhere from 30 to 55 PBS and keep it off and they like hey this is great actually still eat ribeye steaks and salads and but they're not eating croutons they're and so in some sense it looks extreme it sounds ketogenic but it's nothing like that you're just saying basically stay away from you're eliminating processed foods you're eliminating liquid calories in in general you and on and on and so there's nothing sophisticated about it and my question to you is how much of that weight loss effect do you think is calories in versus calories out effect because they're eating a lot of food food and in some cases and how much of it do you think is the elimination or near elimination of this fructose or this glucose fructose combination it's nothing to do with the calories it has everything to do with the insulin if you get the insulin down you're not shunting energy to Fat you can lose weight your fat will give up the ad the uh the the triglyceride stored in it as soon as your insulin goes down insulin is pushing on your fat cell all the time and as long as your insulin's up your fat cell can't release it the minute your insulin goes down you can now engage in what we call lipolysis hormone sensitive lipase is a an enzyme in the fat cell that is uh inhibited by insulin as soon as the insulin's gone hormone sensitive lipase can turn that stored triglyceride into free fatty acids and glycerol and release it and you can lose weight so get the insulin down and it all works so the question is what makes insulin go up well two things refine carbohydrate and sugar those are the two things that make insulin go up in addition Branch chain amino acids make insulin go up as well Lucine isoline veine which is in cornfed beef chicken and fish processed food all right here's here's here's the deal in one concept my colleague Dr Carlos Montero who is a professor of Public Health at the University of sa Paulo has done the world a great service he has developed a system for categorization of food processing it is called the Nova System just means new but he has basically categorized every food anywhere in the world into one of four classes easiest way to explain this would be an example let's take an apple Nova class one would be an apple picked off a tree Nova Class 2 would be apple slices dest stemmed deeded deskinned maybe Nova class 3 would be apple sauce cooked mated possibly a preservative added maybe some extra sugar maybe not Nova class 4 would be a McDonald's apple pie now does that McDonald's apple pie look anything like that Apple no is there even any Apple in it maybe a tiny bit maybe not maybe a tiny bit you know it's it's all flavor enhanced Etc okay turns out and this is epidemiologic data but nonetheless prospective epidemiologic data so it's not useless that Nova class 4 that ultr processed food category which is 73% of the American Grocery Store is the class that is associated with all of these chronic metabolic diseases Nova class 1 through3 no problem now when you say associate what percentage of one's daily total caloric intake needs to come from Nova class 4 before that statement you just made is true because it I love the recommendation you made earlier or the let's just say the the Contour of a you don't have to avoid dessert you can enjoy dessert but don't eat dessert at other times of day and maybe you don't eat dessert every single night is there a rule that people have to eat dessert every single night so the is about 7 to 10% would be the upper limit so you can get 7 to 10% of your caloric intake daily caloric intake from these Nova class 4 foods and still still be okay still be okay so this is I know but that's not what's happening right I know some very healthy Physicians who I used to um observe how people ate and moved because I I would pay attention in my in our field right I I was like oh you know people all around me at Stanford UCSF Etc were successful or else they wouldn't be there I was like you know who looks healthy who can make it up the stairs and doesn't have to take the elevator how much exercise are people doing at a given age are they fanatic you know like four in the morning Runners I'm not going to do that consistently unless I have to um and and I observed that you know many of the healthiest people I know they move a lot during the day they ate very well many of them skip breakfast or lunch not always and then I also noticed that they would drink very little or no alcohol and then but they would enjoy like a uh there's one physician at UCSF in particular I'm thinking of who really enjoyed his dark chocolate Kit Kat after lunch and he sort of very um ceremonial about the unraveling of that uh the foil and the end and I was like okay so you're talking about that small percentage of calories if that if that's if that's all you do hey you know God bless you but that's not what people are doing that's the problem bottom line that Nova class 4 is where all the action is in terms of chronic metabolic disease so the question is how can you avoid that how do you know which is which we have a solution so my colleagues and I have developed a webbased tool that is available to the entire world right now and you'll put it in your show notes yeah we'll put a link to this absolutely it's called perfect p r f a and you can find it at perfect. Co and what it is is it's a recommendation engine not AI we're going to talk about AI in a minute but it is a recommendation engine based on the science of human metabolism that categorizes Foods based on not their nutrient content but on their metap olic effect interesting and so there is a Nova filter which will filter out all the Nova class 4 stuff and it will go to your grocery store and will tell you what you can buy that will be in Nova class 1 through three which turns out to only be 20% of the grocery store it means basically staying on the periphery of the grocery store right general in general yeah the produce the meat the dairy the all the things you mentioned in fact so I'm not low carb I'm low insulin and there are a lot of ways to get to low insulin get rid of the refined carbohydrate get rid of the sugar increase the fiber get rid of the branch chain amino acids okay so eating fish is a good place to be um even eating a steak is okay if it's a uh pasture-fed steak so let's talk about your steak which is also better for the animals right it is absolutely so you mentioned marbling before we love our marbling right we can cut our us gr a steaks with a butter knife because they're so tender right you ever been to Argentina yeah my father's Argentina oh right that's right you're Argentinian yeah they only know they only know Grass Steak the only the idea that that cows would eat anything but grass is sort of like the idea that um fish would would would fly absolutely New Zealand same thing yeah okay the meat is gorgeous it's homogeneous it's pink it's delightful I've been to Argentina the meat is fantastic but you have to use a steak Knife you can't use a butter knife and it takes more chewing it and it takes more chewing because there's senu there you know it's a it's a different experience entirely it's delicious but it is kind of a little bit you know tougher all right turns out that marbling is intramyocellular lipid that animal has metabolic syndrome the American cornfed the American cornfed animal animal because that corn is filled with Branch chain amino acids Lucine isoline veine Branch chain amino acids are what's in protein powder that's what um you know bodybuilders you know put in their smoothies you know to build muscle and if you're building muscle that's okay because 20% of the amino acids in muscle are Branch chain um so you know if you've got a place to put them you know have at it yeah there's a need there cuz they're breaking down muscle yeah fine but if you're not if you're you know again a mere mortal like me you consume those excess Branch chin amino acids they're going to go to the liver they're going to be deamidated like we talked about earlier and they're going to end up as Branch chain organic acids they're going to flood the mitochondria the mitochondria not going to be able to deal with the volume and so they're going to divert the excess and turn that into fat and so now you've got hyper triglyceridemia and chance for fatty liver disease and insulin resistance so what kind of meat you eat has a lot to do with your metabolic Health what about the egg the whole egg near near perfect protein score in terms of its um uh bioavailability um eggs are terrific okay there's nothing wrong with eggs now there are better eggs than others so there so well there's yellow uh yolk eggs and they're orange yolk eggs what's the difference between a yellow Oak egg and an orange I'm guessing that something about the uh the feed of the the mother chicken um and I'm guessing it probably also has something to do with choline content Omega-3s ah interesting okay the orange uh yolk egg has a lot of Omega-3s in it what are other great sources of Omega-3s I I I know some off the top of my head but I'd like to hear it from you okay so marine life is number one okay um you know fish provided you're not bringing in heavy metals with it well yes so I mean that's always the the the argument you know the question is you know is it the Mercury or is it the Omega-3s ultimately I think it's the Omega-3s that is more important but yes I do understand the Mercury issue um uh ultimately there are three Omega-3s there's ala alpha linolenic acid which you can get in vegetables there is EPA I aoic acid which you can only get in marine life fish oil cod liver oil right and finally DHA dooh heex enoic acid which you also get from marine life but you can get from algae so you can get algal oil which you know the vegans will use do you um personally take anything to increase your omega-3 intake I I know that there's even prescription Omega-3s I take fish oil you take a fish oil yeah uh the I only take three I only take three supplements okay I'd like to know what those are I will say that I always always always say behaviors first right dos and don'ts Behavior nutrition then only if needed and one can afford it then supplementation and prescription drugs and I'm a big consumer of supplements and always have been frankly so what are the three so you take fish oil fish oil and do you take to get above a certain threshold of EPA about th000 milligrams you say about a gram a Daya okay uh vitamin C how much vitamin C do you th000 milligrams a day you line is paing yeah well it's actually for my rosacea I've got a um skin issue and vitamin C helps with helps with that interesting and finally vitamin D now I will tell you vitamin D is a complicated one all right uh let and we can talk about vitamin D and how either important or non-important it is because there's a there's a quirk to vitamin D and uh uh it it's important for your audience to know about it because everybody in his brothers you know touting vitamin D a cure for everything it's sort of funny because that you have your supplement lovers haters and agnostics but vitamin D somehow made it through the shoot like everyone's like Pro vitamin D it's really interesting somehow vitamin D people are comfortable taking a gel a vitamin D gel cap but like other supplements where you say oh like maybe um this might be good for uh you know like Omega-3s and fish them people are a little bit like more standoffish it's really interesting that the kind of PS social stuff around this how much vitamin D do you personally take I take 5,000 units a day okay so do I vitamin D is complicated though here's the problem if you look at the literature vitamin D deficiency is associated with all these chronic metabolic diseases however supplementation with vitamin D has not fixed any of those so if you're vitamin D deficient why wouldn't some supplementation fix it couple of reasons one one of the reasons for vitamin D deficiency is because everyone's drinking soft drinks that's one reason but there's a more important reason uh sugar and artificially sweetened soft drinks yeah can deplete vitamin D utiliz well you're not consuming Dairy because you're consuming soft drinks but I can't tolerate milk anymore well and you take vitamin D but here's the here's the real nugget of Truth and this is a little complicated but the endocrinologists and the audience will get it vitamin D is a pre-pro hormone it's not it's not active at all vitamin D is converted in the liver first step to a compound called 25 hydroxy vitamin D that is a pro hormone it also is inactive it has no activity whatsoever from there 25 hydroxy vitamin D can be metabolized one of two ways it can either be one alpha hydroxylated in the kidney to the active form one alpha one uh 25 dihydroxy vitamin D which will then do all of the business of vitamin D such as calcium absorption from the gut suppression of the immune system at the toll like receptor 4 that sounds like a bad thing no that's a good thing I know but I had to bring that up because when you say suppression immune system people go I'm immunosuppressed nobody that sounds like AIDS a good it suppresses inflammation got it it's a good thing okay suppression of inflamation and that's actually the point that we're we're getting to so there are a lot of good things about 125 dihydroxy vitamin D however that 25 hydroxy D that came out of the liver can be metabolized a different way it can be 24 hydroxy in in inflammatory tissue like tuberculosis sarcoid gut inflammation and so you will end up taking your 25 hydroxy D which is a pro hormone and turning it into the inactive 2425 dihydroxy D which then just gets excreted out so in other words you consumed all this vitamin D and it didn't go where you needed it to go and the reason was because you're inflamed you you have to fix the inflammation before the vitamin D can be effective and 93% of Americans are inflamed so giving them vitamin D is not going to do a damn thing got it is reducing fructose intake the one of the primary ways to reduce systemic inflammation absolutely what are some others reducing oxidative stress in general so heavy metals like cadmium you know cadmium is very high in chocolate especially South America chocolate sorry no I I'm not a fan of chocolate I occasionally like a little dark chocolate but but um so if people are going to uh eat chocolate they should be careful how much chocolate they eat well especially if it's South American chocolate and processed chocolate I mean the really good we're going to be on the hit list of so many Industries after this episode comes out all I can tell you is I've been on the hit list for a decade and I'm still you're you're just one big Target yeah right got it I got to I it's on my back you know kick me everywhere I already got that um uh there are uh uh the main thing is to make that gut work right so fiber short chain fatty acid production from fiber uh is a huge you know uh Boon and to reduce inflammation to reduce inflammation how about improving sleep is there any evidence that you know chronic slight sleep deprivation can increase inflammation well what it will do is it'll increase cortisol and chronically increased cortisol will definitely lead to increased inflammation you know which is funny because cortisol is usually considered the anti-inflammatory but only acutely right chronic cortisol elevation does the opposite if if we can contribute to I have this secret uh agenda which is not which is not a secret which is that people think cortisol is bad when in fact acutely cortisol does wonderful things provided it's happening at the right time of day right late shifted cortisol bad right too much or too frequent cortisol bad but cortisol you you need it it's so essential and I think most people just hear cortisol and it's been associated with all things bad and and maybe we can help shift that narrative yeah I'm I'm very happy I mean as an endocrinologist you know this is you know where this my wheelhouse is where I live um cortisol is a good news bad news deal like so many things short-term gain for long-term pain okay so when you are in what we call allostasis that is Pur ation of homeostasis that is a stress an acute stress cortisol is one of the things that helps you manage that bodily and mental stress so an English test a car accident running away from the lion you know the famous you know pygmy running away from the lion all of those require cortisol in order to manage and mitigate that stress the upcoming 2024 election that's chronic stress that is not acute stress didn't mean that's the worst that'll be the only mention of Politics on this podcast uh and we don't have to go there but we're all chronically stressed and we can talk about why that is and what's going on and I'm actually very interested in that and a colleague of mine in Paris and I have built a computational model of the lyic system which focuses on the stress center of the brain the amydala to understand how chronic stress is different from acute stress and how that chronic stress ultimately leads to metabolic and mental health disaster very interested in learning more about that before we touch on that you've worked a lot with kids MH um people age as you put it 0 to 19 I don't know about the exact numbers but when I was growing up there were some kids in school that were overweight but it was the occasional kid right now it seems depending on where one draws the threshold for overweight it seems that there are a lot of kids that are overweight um how about 25% obese and 40% overweight okay so obviously a serious problem now and going forward what about adults in the US um I remember seeing at a meeting a map of obesity in the US and um over time and it very quickly filled in from very few people were obese to very many Colorado was this um was this like like Beacon of of of fit people but now it's no longer and that's too oh okay cool I'll tell you why there there are four things that can increase mitochondrial uh uh uh biogenesis you going to tell me altitude is one cold yeah that's why Colorado is less obese altitude that's why Colorado is less obese and um uh were the other two I for but those were the reason it had nothing to do with being more fit it had to do with cold and altitude example Switzerland compared to Germany they got the same crappy food but Switzerland has half the Obesity that Germany does because Switzerland is higher oh I love the food when I go to Munich I love the Schnitzel and the sauerkraut and wonder they got that in Switzerland too okay so they have great food Switzerland's less obese right same way Colorado's less obese it's because of the altitude you you mentioned cold uh many listeners of this podcast are at least interested in some uh also practice deliberate cold exposure cold showers cold plunges mainly for the um I think the best data are the increases in catacol Mees epinephrine nephrine dopamine that are long-lasting people feel a big state shift they feel better yeah but when one looks at the effects on metabolism they're pretty slight they are they're slight however studies like that to me always seem um shortsighted in the sense that if there's a longer Arc of effect on the mitochondria that's affecting other things in terms of how calories are processed or how calories are feeding into mitochondrial function or dysfunction there I could see how it might shift the um shift the scal so to speak I mean cold is is an amazingly powerful stimulus it is and um I think of light cold food movement it's kind of like the core four way in which you can shift physiology easily all of these things are imminently manipulable and for almost Z okay but you have to know what you're doing and right now we've been actually kept from that knowledge and you know if you're addicted it's really hard to un addict yourself so that brings us back to this thing about um food industry conspiracies government conspiracies and the rest boy this is going to be interesting um we can go uh section but what do we do like so if you and I go up to cap capitol hill which I've done yeah which you've done and and maybe I'll join you someday um and you know you're UCSF I'm down at Stanford you're a clinician I'm a scientist and and a public health Advocate um podcaster right and we explain to people Hey listen like there's the food is laced with a drug it's it's not even really food it's it's not food an aggregate of food and non-food parts that make you think it's food it's sort of like telling people hey your kids are you know they're swimming in a swimming pool looks like water but it's actually part poison and it's and it's harming them it's giving them you know if you say those kinds of things I mean congressmen and women are they're like reasonably smart people right I mean AR aren't they going to do something about it no so where is the conflict is it that the food industry has um the government by the short hairs that's exactly right and they have them by the short hairs where I mean is it are they lining their pockets I mean where where where is The Leverage act actually exerted okay so they're they are lining their pockets that's number one that is absolutely true we have the data to support that blanch Lincoln who was a senator from Arkansas who is the chairman of the nutrition committee you had to see her campaign contributions every time she was up for re-election so it's all about getting reelected or it's about them like having a like a third home in the Hamptons so I think it's the third home in the Hamptons more than anything wow okay so it's really as bad as as as some of the documentaries make us believe without question good and we and and we have the data there is a uh uh an organization that I absolutely want to call out because they are you know the most egregious organ you political organization on the face of the Earth they're called the American legislative exchange Council Alec or alic and they write bills they are a bill Mill okay and they are for whoever gives them money and who gives them money big Pharma big Agra big oil and uh big food and you're so you're including big Pharma you're a physician you've written scripts before you've written prescriptions for patients before isn't that Pharma that provides the drugs that allows your patients to feel better well the question is do they do they feel better this is a big question let's you want to go there but you're writing the script I mean I mean I'm just trying I'm not trying to trying to challenge you but I see so so you don't uh there have to be instances where someone's thyroid deficient and you give them you know drug AB so if so if if you've got a disease and a medicine will replace what's missing sure okay so for deficiency diseases which as an endocrinologist that's what I do absolutely and I did that you know with no compunction of uh of impropriety whatsoever but that's not what we're talking about here let's talk about what we're really talking about let's start with stattin Statin lower LDL okay does statins reduce heart disease yes or no you know I seem to be whiffing today on all the quizzes and it's kind of becoming fun for me at this level I'm going to go with no but but I will say you know my friend and I think his expert uh physician as well you know Peter AA and others you know has talked about some of the positive attributes of Statin in certain cases for certain PA in certain cases that's exactly right and I completely agree and by the way Peter's a friend and you know we someday we'll we'll you know all you know go out drinking together well I won't drink but how about we share a steak share a absolutely you got it you guys I don't I don't know if he drink he drinks a little bit if if you're listening okay he drinks a little bit house on me yeah I don't do the dessert or the or the alcohol anymore but but I'm and it's not so I can live to be 120 it's so I can wake up the next morning and and uh keep up with you guys it's fine yeah I get the so for primary prevention that is your LDL is high you need a Statin that's primary prevention you haven't declared yourself you haven't had an event for primary prevention the mean increase in lifespan for being on a Statin is four days four days four days four days S I have to chuckle that's that's uh and the risk for diabetes is 20% increase what about any Improvement in in quality of life done for primary prevention now for secondary prevention for secondary in other words you've already declared yourself you already have a problem for secondary prevention that's where Statin shine so there's a value to them I'm not arguing that and if you have familial hypercholesterolemia which is one in 500 okay not only do you need a Statin but you need a lowfat diet and a priest okay so there is definitely a value to stattin but not for primary prevention but that's what everybody what every doctor is doing oh your LDL it's over 80 you know you need a Statin that's ridiculous that is absolutely a joke and the data show that in fact in fact my colleague aim Malhotra in the UK participated in an analysis where they took the entire UK population and they took out everybody under age 65 so looking at people 65 to 90 and it turned out that the LDL level correlated with longevity the higher the LDL the longer they lived when you took out all the people who had problems so LDL is not really the problem and the reason is because there are two ldls there's one called large buoyant there's one called small D turns out dietary fat raises your large buoyant your large buoyant is irrelevant it is cardiovascularly neutral but that's the one that statins affects the small dense that's the atherogenic particle when your small dense LDL is high that means you are not clearing triglyceride peripherally because that's what small D show you that's that that's what happens to triglyceride is become they become small dense can I take a guess and say that the best way to reduce small dens is to reduce insulin yes by reducing sugar because that triglyceride is made in the liver it's all palmitate and that's the only fat that the liver knows how to make and so triglyceride is your liver output of carbohydrate that's how you have to look at triglyceride so triglyceride turns out to be much more important as a cardiovascular risk factor than LDL ever was so does the does big Pharma and big food do they know all of this yes I know they know because they've told me so and but they have statins to sell and Foods in the uh the Nova class 4 mhm they know this too so you know I'm an optimist or you know what what's it going to take to really move the needle I mean you described the four barriers um we're trying to add to the knowledge component now um you know what's it going to take is it going to take uh you know having a president in an office or uh Congress people in office that really understand and care about this stuff yeah I mean to really revamp the whole system yeah so right now the system is completely and utterly broken completely and utterly broken and there's a reason why it's completely and utterly broken because the food industry likes it that way well it's profitable for them obviously there are 51 different federal agencies that manage our food 51 and none of them know what the other ones doing and the food industry likes it that way so communication across these 51 organizations would help well if we had a centralized food um zor or food uh you know if we split the food off the FDA because you know it's like it's not the FDA it's the da or the FDA is not the Food and Drug Administration it's the Federal Drug Administration they spend a lot of time on drugs they spend almost no time on food well let's think about where there's been success so I can recall when people smoked on planes I actually recall going to a gym in Europe and there was an ashtray molded into the squat rack yep that was telling y I don't see people smoking cigarettes around Stanford Hospital anymore but I remember when they initially said that people couldn't smoke any where except in this one little designated area right and that's typically what you see nowadays and my understanding of the anti-smoking campaign at least for kids for people 18 and younger was that telling people it was bad for their health didn't work showing them lungs that were decrepit didn't work what worked was showing them commercials of cackling handwriting um white guys who were talking about how much money they were making off of these um uh naive kids who were buying cigarettes and other tobacco products so it became a the the effective campaign to end smoking in young people was to hijack their re inherent rebelliousness of Youth and then they were like no we're not going to stick it to them like you know the the as my friend calls it like the two the two-finger business card like No And so that worked that worked vaping's making a comeback we vaping is a sep episode we won't get into that but because nicotine is still addictive but you don't see a lot of people smoking cigarettes so it worked like something that you would never imagine could ever work worked well so yes no I mean that's part of it I'm not going to tell you that it's not it is part of it um and we actually have an example of how that could be applied to another uh uh uh toxic substance sugar we had Berkeley versus big soda you know that's how Berkeley ended up with its soda tax that dates back to 2015 the city of Berkeley city of Berkeley it we just celebrated the 5year anniversary of the Berkeley soda teex and we've been able to actually look gestational diabetes way down obesity down slightly not a lot but a little bit um cardiovascular disease down Dean Schillinger and Chris Madson at UCSF and UC Berkeley just presented at San Francisco General just um three weeks ago so a soda tax like the cigarette tax just makes soda expensive exactly so you're telling me that a can of Coke that I buy on shatak Avenue in Berkeley costs more than a can of Coke that I buy in on University Avenue in pal Alto it does huh okay by buy a dime and that was and sufficient enough to to create this kind of change well yes it money hurts cuz money hurts exactly so Andrew there have been four count them four cultural tectonic shifts in America in the last 30 years and they're all undeniable here they are number one bicycle helmets and seat bels oh everybody uses those two smoking in public places Nobody Does that three um drunk driving hopefully fewer people are doing that four condoms and bathrooms condoms in bathrooms in bathrooms in public bathrooms yeah you see those more available okay yeah all right 30 years ago if a legislator stood up in a state house and proposed legislation for any one of those four and I don't care if it's in a state house or in Congress or in Parliament or in the Duma or anywhere else in the world okay they have gotten laughed right out of town Nanny state liberty interest get out of my kitchen get out of my bathroom get out of my car okay today they Ro Facts of Life right nobody's belly aching about any of those the point is we were able to solve those four Public Health tobacco how did we do it how did we solve those four no one could imagine that we would ever solve smoking right but we did sort of I mean we brought consumption down by half okay that's pretty good when you think about it for an addictive substance how many fewer people are dying of lung cancer nowadays in the US um it's like 80% lower wow well there's also been improvements in treatment but yeah but no but it's it's the in diagnosed with in inci incidence gone down amazing okay because tobacco's gone down so the question is how did that happen the answer is very and why did it take 30 years to do it we taught the children the children grew up and they voted and the naysayers are dead that's how you make a cultural tectonic shift so we now have this real food Movement we have people who are arguing against ultr processed food we have kids who are demanding different in their schools and by the way what is the biggest fast food franchise in the United States I'm going to get this wrong so try me again I don't know I've never tried it but I've heard of uh is it Chick-fil-A nope is it McDonald's I don't know it is this nation's Public Schools ah you can add up McDonald's Subway Burger King chickfila and uh Wendy's and every other uh fast food franchise Jack in the Box every fast food franchise in the entire country and would only be half our nation's Public Schools wow so could you imagine a world where there were no class three or class four Nova Foods allowed in uh in public schools and we're doing it so I am the chief science officer of a nonprofit and put this in the show notes called eat e.org and we have a new business model for public schools so in 197 71 the Department of Education issued an administrative ordinance called resolution 242 and they did this purely on monetary ISS reasons this was under Nixon and what this resolution 242 said was that all School cafeterias all throughout the country had to make book they had to basically cover their costs they couldn't be lost leaders for the school they had to fend for themselves well this sent every food service director in the country scurrying for you know how am I going to do this because I got all these you know uh you know Lunch Ladies you know which you know personnel and and food preparation equipment and and and costs you know that are you know mounting how am I going to break even they couldn't do it so in walk walks you know Aramark and Cisco and uh Guggenheim and McDonald's and they say hey we'll do it for you we'll provide every kid in America with a nutritious meal Every Single Day hot lunch well they didn't say hot okay they just said lunch okay nutritious they said nutritious and I put that in air quotes too because it wasn't nutritious and here's the added benefit you can take your food preparation facilities and your um uh footprint in the school and you can turn that into classrooms because you're going to need them and that was the goal because as soon as you've moved the food preparation facilities out of the school you are now Hostage to the food industry for the rest of your life uh and I could also see how that allows room for them to use these commoditized Foods foods that have very long shelf life exactly right because you want to make sure that you know if you only sold um you know two-thirds of the lunches that were prepared that on next Tuesday after after the weekend you could still give them food that isn't moldy exactly right and I will tell you so that's how it happened and you can actually Trace IQ scores and reading and math scores in this country down from 1971 to today when I went to school I was allowed to get I called it hot lunch because it was usually hot I was um allowed to get the school lunch one day a week one day a week the other days I had to bring my lunch mhm that one day was pretty special like you felt like you were getting a treat it was usually like a corn dog or a hamburger the hamburger was pretty poultry but the um it's a commoditized hamburger yeah commoditized hamburger um you had to go looking for the Patty portion um and the bread was sweetened and so it was different right but um I don't remember nearly as much obesity I went to to high school in the early 90s MH um so you're saying that now if I went to a high school it would be a lot more sodas and donuts and pizza and got it yeah Pizza is a vegetable didn't you know they claim it's a vegetable Congress said Pizza is a vegetable Amy kashar made pizza of vegetable maybe they need their eyes Che because the biggest frozen pizza uh uh uh producer is in Minnesota I mean the ketchup as a vegetable was was a was a stretch but at least it it made sense on the Nova System of going from tomato all the way to uh to uh ketchup ketchup since high fructose corn syrup is the primary ingredient in ketchup indeed so the point is that our kids are suffering under the weight the burden of this chronic disaster of ultra processed food which is not food and no wonder they're all obese and uh um uh sick and um uh you know doing so poorly in school and by the way also depressed Ultra processed food has now been shown in three separate studies to correlate with depression in teenagers so what is the relationship between processed food or maybe we call it Nova System level 34 foods and depression and other psychiatric challenges and if you could you separate out metabolic syndrome from obesity um in answering that like like is there something inherently depressing about carrying excess adapost tissue a setting aside any kind of aesthetic um uh stuff you know how people want to look or are perceived you know just is there anything bad about carrying a lot of body fat independent of the metabolic syndrome for mood and and overall sense of well-being no I'm really glad you asked that Andrew we should have actually covered this earlier um everyone thinks fat is fat as we've learned fat is not fat and a fat is not a fat but um body fat is not body fat there are three fat Depot and they are metabolically different the first is the does this bathing suit make me look fat fat by the way never answer that question that's called subcutaneous fat or big butt fat if you will so here's the question how many pounds or kilos of subcutaneous fat do you have to gain before you become metabolically ill I have no idea about 10 kilos about 22 pounds okay why the reason is because that subcutaneous fat drains into the systemic circulation so you have to have a lot of cyto kindes coming from those subcutaneous adipocytes to raise the blood level of cyto kindes to the point where it starts doing damage at the level of the liver so fat are releasing cytoid which are pro-inflammatory exactly and they're doing that at rest any fat cell any fat cell okay any fat cell but if it's going to the systemic circulation you have a volume of distribution of six liters so you have to lose you know you have to have a lot of cyto kindes to get the concentration up now just out of fairness to the fat how many cyto kindes does a muscle cell release I mean are we unfairly picking on adapost tissue because why would adapost tissue be pro-inflammatory I mean a single fat cell I've got a fat cell sitting at you know on my shoulder someplace right I mean I'm not zero fat at my shoulder why would it be pro-inflammatory so in fact the fat cell itself is not here's what happens the fat cell has a fat vacu it has a storage place for this lipid droplet you stuff it you stuff it you stuff it the fat vacu gets big bigger bigger bigger the perpen border that encompasses that fat vacu that borders the the this the space ultimately can't get any bigger and it starts breaking down when that happens it spills the grease into the fat cell the fat cell dies becomes necrotic that calls macras in to clean up the grease and it's the Mac rages that release the cyto kindes all right so in fact the fat cell is not the problem it's the breakdown of the grease that lead leads to the maccrage activation that's the problem but when you do it in subcutaneous fat it's going into this six lit tank and so the concentration doesn't go up very much so 10 kilos before before you start seeing some effect fat Depot number two visceral or big belly fat now how many pounds or kilos of big belly fat do you have to gain before you get metabolic leil I don't know but I'm guessing it's less than 22 pounds it's way less oh for once I got an answer right today that's right about five about five pounds now question is why number one the visceral fat does not drain into the into the systemic circulation it drains into the portal vein which goes straight to the liver so you're getting a bigger load going straight to the liver of cyto kindes not to the kidney good thing about getting an answer wrong folks is that you never forget the correct answer that's what I always tell my students right so I'll never forget that indeed got it and the question is what made the visceral fat in the first place was it calories no it's cortisol it's stress it's the combination of the sympathetic nervous system and cortisol and the reason we know this is because you can take patients with major depressive disorder with endogenous depression who are suicidal who have to be admitted to the hospital to keep themselves from killing themselves stick them in a scanner and they are losing subcutaneous fat like crazy because they're not eating but they're gaining visceral fat because of the high cortisol and the stress so there's something about the adrenocorticoid receptors in that area that just preferentially Depot fat there when cortisol is high indeed because that's the metabolically active fat right and five pounds will do it and then finally the third fat Depot the liver now how many pounds of fat can the liver store before you become metabolically ill I got to be even less because the liver is not nearly as large as the sort of abdominal region half a pound quarter of a kilo how much does a healthy liver weigh healthy liver weighs 1500 grams okay okay so you know it's not very I'm trying to translate quickly pound so we're going metri we're going a standard so, 1500 Gram would be 3 lb so you know basically half a pound okay so not very much because that's where the action is and so when you have fat in your liver it causes metabolic dysfunction right away and the question is where did that fat come from that came from alcohol or sugar so alcohol and sugar most metabolically egregious because it affects the liver directly stress second most because it affects the visceral fat and subcutaneous fat the least important in terms of metabolic derangement so yes it may not look good in the bathing suit but from a metabolic standpoint it is actually the least important so the question then becomes all right what are you trying to fix if you're trying to fix liver fat it's really easy get rid of the alcohol and the sugar except of course they're both addictive well that also liberate any fat that's already in the liver absolutely and that's one of the reasons why intermittent fasting works is because it gives your liver a chance to basically offload what it's already stored that's one of the things that intermittent fasting will buy you is a little e uh less liver fat so that's a good thing right now stress on the other hand as you know and as we've talked about and as you know you've had Dr lle on your podcast before you know stress is tough you know trying to mitigate stress especially in today's environment and I hope you'll invite me back sometime to talk about the the role of stress on um the amydala yeah gladly okay um and then finally you know subcutaneous fat so when people go on diet sweeteners what are they doing are they really reducing the fat and the answer is no when you're talking about artificial sweeteners artificial diet sweeteners of any sort you can pick your artificial sweetener so aspartame or you know uh suc sucos Stevia monk fruit uh um uh the new ones you know yeah the one that people are more excited about nowadays is alos Al it's expensive it tends to have less of an artificial sweetener taste that people can detect right um so you're saying that regardless of oh and we should I'm remembering from the comment section I do read them artificial sweeteners and non caloric sweeteners yes because the moment you say artificial people say what about Stevia what about alalo so so let's just say um non-caloric sweeteners can wrap our arms around all that entire category unless we need to distinguish among the different participants in that category so you're saying that even though people can um lower their total choric intake pretty effectively I've seen the studies that show if you know dieters who consume um water only as their you know main liquid versus diet sodas with aspartame typically or Stevia the diet soda drinkers actually lose more weight but we know that but you're saying there may be deposition of fat in the liver in those individuals be specifically because of the artificial sweetener because of the insulin turns out there's still an insulin resp response it's a fa very famous study done in um Copenhagen 100 normal individuals 25 in four different groups one group uh one uh one liter of sugared soda per day for six months one liter that's a lot of sugar soda yeah one group one liter of diet soda per day for six months I probably did that in graduate school one group one liter of milk per day for six months I probably did that when I was an infant and finally one final group one liter of water per day for 6 months I do that now I do more than that but yeah the one liter of soda per day in six months gained 10 kilos the sugary soda the sugary soda 10 kilos okay 10 kilos no surprise the one liter of water per day lost two kilos also no surprise those were the easy ones now let's do the ones in the middle one liter of milk per day no change presumably that was full fat milk we're talking about milk full fat milk yeah they like their their full fat milk no change why is that they're taking on an enormous increase in total caloric intake I'm guessing that there was a blunted insulin response due to the fat and the milk and also because lactose is not a very uh uh Big Driver of insulin response and because there's a satiety effect that's like food eat less yeah it's like food like food and finally the key the kicker to the whole thing diet soda the one liter of diet soda what what would you predict their weight would do more weight loss than in the water group based on my understanding of the literature they gained two kilos wild because they ate more well you tell me why why did they gain 2 kilos if they were consuming a liter of dioda which are zero calories the answer is because they still generated an insulin response and that insulin response generated more hunger more more weight and more hunger exactly and that's the key so they didn't gain the 10 kilos they gained two kilos so it looks better compared to the sugar uh uh version but it looks like you know a problem compared to the water version or even the milk version so unless you bootstrap calories and hold that constant you're going to see a weight gain due to artificial sweetener exactly right and that's been shown 50 ways from Sunday at a whole bunch of different studies so compared to Sugar yeah it's better but compared to water it's way worse and the reason is the insulin response you put something sweet on the tongue message goes tongue to brain Sugar's coming message goes brain to pancreas through the vus nerve Sugar's coming release the insulin and so tongue doesn't know if it's sugar or not it releases the ins the pancreas releases the insulin which drives energy into fat whether it was you know from the uh diet sweetener or not I I saw some really interesting data from Dana Small's group at Yale showing that when people have a diet soda with food so this is like the diet coke with the sandwich or with the burger maybe with the pasta the insulin response from the food and the insulin response from the diet soda are compounded but there's a classical conditioning effect pavlovian effect such that then later if they just drink the diet soda they get an even bigger insulin response just to the diet soda than they would have originally if they only had the diet soda separate from food so in other words the the insulin the food induced insulin response is conditioning a greater insulin response from the diet soda and we actually have another study that demonstrates the same thing out of Singapore um teay at all uh American Journal clinical nutrition 2018 I believe that looked at a similar Paradigm here's what they did they took a bunch of people and they admitted them to their Clinical Research Center four times a week apart and they did it in random order and each time they uh started the morning they fasting and they did either a sucrose tolerance test or an aspartame tolerance test or a sucralose tolerance test or a monk fruit tolerance test so two hours you know ingesting one of the three one of the four and measuring glucose and Insulin over the course of the next two hours fasted fasted okay okay then it was time for lunch and they let them have whatever lunch they want it was a metabolic Buffet they could eat whatever they wanted off the buffet except that they were being clocked and the same for dinner they were being clocked but they could eat whatever they wanted in a given period of time in the 24 hours okay you know or you know from 7:00 a. to 7 p.m. whenever they went home okay turned out the sucrose tolerance test generated an insulin response as you'd expect the monk fruit the Ste the uh U uh sucralose and the aspartame did not but then when they ate lunch they if they had had one of the three diet sweeteners in the morning they ate more at lunch and more at dinner and generated an increased insulin response both at lunch and dinner so that the area under the curve for the whole day was exactly the same so they ate a significantly more yeah yeah because they had the diet soda in the morning Wild Well I drink drinks that contain Stevia and I don't worry about it it too much but what you're saying is even if I bootstrap my calories there's a possibility that the insulin response could have Direct effects on the liver exactly right and not for the better and not for the better now having said that um we have undertaken an interesting project which I don't know if you know about um in 2020 during the pandemic I was approached by a food company in the Middle East called Kuwaiti Danish Dairy company kdd it's the Nestle of the Middle East now they make all sorts of junk frozen yogurt flavored milks ice cream confectionary biscuits tomato sauce okay Kuwait has an 18% diabetes rate and an 80% obesity rate 8 Z 8 Z wow in the adults all right now the company recognized that they wanted to be a metabolically healthy company and they knew they weren't they contacted me and said would you put together a scientific advisory team to advise us what we need to do to change the food in order to be a metabolically healthy company and we want to lead and I said we'd be ha I'd be happy to do that with one Proviso we get to publish what what we did so that it can serve as a road map for the rest of the food industry and they said fine and so I convened a scientific advisory team with my colleague wolf from Alderson who started the very first farmers market in Los Angeles and is now actually the director of sustainability and nutrition for kdd um uh Tim Harland who is the head of culinary medicine at George Washington University Rachel Gaal who is a fatty acid expert who ran the Omega-3 for add trial at the NIH and Andreas corot who's actually a computer scientist from Stanford and we basically stripped down every single thing that kdd did in terms of procurement in terms of ingredients in terms of packaging we submitted every single ingredient to biochemical analysis because you couldn't trust what the vendors were basically telling kdd was in the food we had had to actually know what was in the food and that was a half a million dollars all by itself I mean this was not a cheap little uh you know uh you know sojourn into the woods this was a big deal we basically re-engineered their entire 180 item portfolio and they have now turned over 10% of their products to be metabolically healthy and the precepts that we set in this paper which is in Frontiers and nutrition in March of this year 2023 three things three principles if you adhere to these three principles you can turn any food healthy including Ultra processed food number one protect the liver number two feed the gut number three support the brain if you have a food that does all three of those it is healthy if you have a food that does none of those three then it's poison because it's not food it's I was going to say it doesn't sound like food is is the right um the right descriptor in that case exactly and if it's does one or two but not all three then it's going to be somewhere in between so the goal was to take all of KD's products and move them from you know the lowest tier up to the highest tier by adhering to these three principles and we came up with some very simple things number one got to get rid of the sugar number two got to add fiber number three got to add Omega-3s number four got to do something about the emulsifiers because the emulsifiers are causing the gut inflammation because after all msif fires are detergents they hold fat and water together they burn a hole in the mucin layer so they're actually contributing to that gut inflammation and emulsifiers are you know strewn throughout ultr processed food them we've heard about hidden sugars a lot um during today's episode and elsewhere but based on everything you told us of about artificial excuse me low calorie sweeteners um it makes more sense to me now why foods that are not touted as diet foods would be laced with things like sucralose because it should drive the craving for that food through increases in insulin and craving of other Foods later that day and later that evening is that why non-caloric sweeteners are added to all sorts of foods now that because typically one thing non-caloric sweet probably only added to quote unquote diet foods low calorie foods but that's not their only you're right it's that that's not the case and they are adding diet diet sweeteners to foods that you didn't know had diet sweeteners in them that's right um there are two reasons that this happens one is insulin because insulin blocks leptin signaling at the level of the hypothalamus and the nucleus accumbent so if it blocks leptin leptin is the hormone that your fat cells make that tells your brain you've had enough so if insulin blocks leptin it makes you hungrier and it also extinguishes it it stops the extinguishing of reward by that food so that you want more of it so it does both because leptin normally suppresses food intake and reduces craving the analogy that comes to mind is um a slot machine that encourages you to feed more money and hit go to pull the lever but that also blinds you to the outcome so even if you win you don't even know that you have wins it's also blinding you to your losses you're effectively becoming automaton yeah of just eating without any um kind of conscious understanding of what you're you're bringing in or tasting the food any longer exactly right it's not this like and Anna lmy when she came on the podcast author of dopamine nation and obviously head of our dual diagnosis addiction clinic at Stanford talked about you know these these consumptive behaviors where people are scrolling social media or consuming porn or uh consuming drugs or alcohol in a way that like they're not in touch with the pleasure of the of the substance or behavior anymore they become automatons but they but if they don't do it they feel lousy so the pleasure is gone the pain is definitely waiting tolerance and dependence that's the definition of addiction so dopamine is an excitatory neurotransmitter it excites the next neuron always there was no such thing as dopamine inh iting a postoptic neuron dopamine stimulates the next neuron and it doesn't matter which dopamine receptor it is 1 through five it's always excitatory now neurons like to be excited that's why they have receptors but neurons like to be tickled not bludgeoned chronic overstimulation of any neuron and you know this leads to neuronal cell death and the reason is because the neuron needs energy the neuron is the most energy dependent uh tissue in the body it needs those mitochondria to be pumping out ATP like crazy to engage in neurotransmission well when you're firing nonstop you risk cell death so the excitatory neuron the the poptic neuron has a plan B it downregulates the receptor it downregulates the dopamine receptor so there's less chance that any stray dopamine molecule will find a receptor to bind to and this is its Plan B in order to try to mitigate the risk of dying well what does that mean in human terms it means you get a hit you get a rush receptors go down next time you need a bigger hit to get the same rush and receptors go down and you need a bigger hit and a bigger hit and a bigger hit until finally you need a huge hit to get nothing that's called tolerance and then when the neurons do start to die that's called addiction that's what we've got and that's what's happened in terms of food addiction so the question is what's addictive is fat addictive no because if fat was addictive then all the people on the Atkins diet or on the ketogenic diet would be gaining weight not losing it and I'd be craving ribe eyes all day I like a ribeye pretty often actually but I know I know people say no but hey look my lip lipids are in in line and I I don't eat many starches and I certainly avoid sugar although now I'm thinking I might want to really reduce my uh low calorie sweetener intake I don't see myself reducing my Stevia intake to zero because it's in some things I really like Andrew I am not the food police um you know I always say that to people I'm not a cop but the um but but but data are data and and and Health Data are the the the data say that that's not helping you any that's what the data say mhm um point is that the Fat's not the problem the salt's not the problem the caffeine's a problem really caffeine's classic addictive substance at every level yeah but in term su's a problem but if if one can cut out caffeine by the early afternoon or even sooner in the day and it's not consumed to excess um and it's in the form or coffee orate some other form that's healthy you know is it really that much of a problem um I love coffee in your that's my addiction like with a capital l underline bold face highlight I I I I I feel your pain and the answer is no one has shown that coffee is toxic it is addictive but it's not toxic now if you mix the coffee with alcohol now you got four Loco now it's toxic but in and of itself caffeine is not um toxic and that's why there's a Starbucks on every street corner but it is highly reinforcing I did an episode on caffeine where um covered some data that was published in the journal science one of the three Apex journals um and if you put caffeine unbeknownst to the consumer into plain yogurt people will crave plain yogurt indeed much more I mean people will like the feeling of being caffein as long as it's not creating anxiety levels of energy exactly I'm going to stick with caffeine that's fine yeah and so will I we've been talking about a little bit about the hypothalamus as well as some peripheral gut-based mechanisms for hunger and satiety right um this is a great opportunity to talk about some of the glp1 agonists that are now um widely used so things T typically called those zic but gop1 gluc glucon like peptide one right um originally discovered in the hila monster which eats very seldom and some really smart biologist I love biology like this said how come they don't have to eat very much well they their blood is loaded with g P1 right um and so they only have to eat one Whatever Hilo monsters um Delight in per year or something outrage just like that humans make glp1 as well my understanding is that glp1 that that not that's injected but that one um makes naturally is acting on both the brain and the gut to increase satiety so it is acting on the brain no argument but the primary action is on the gut glp1 decreases the rate of gastric emptying that is its primary driver yes it does affect the brain I'm not arguing that it does but the primary effect is to reduce the rate of gastric emptying so you stay Fuller longer because the food doesn't move through the stomach and the intestine interesting in South America in uguay and Argentina it was long thought that um y bam mate consumption which we know very modestly increases glp1 and by the way a lot of other things do too um that people were taking it for its uh after meals for its laxative effect partially but that's you know it's not pleasant for but that's but that's also at the colon that's at the level of rather stomach but it is used fairly effectively for people to space their meals without snacking that you're you know and maybe it's the glp1 maybe it's something else um but people are injecting themselves with glp1 analog now $1,300 a month is that what it cost that's what it costs right now um and it seems to be pretty effective at inducing weight loss although a significant amount of that weight loss seems to be from a skeletal muscle tissue and we're going we need to talk about that so what are your thoughts on OIC as as a primary uh earlier you talked about primary and secondary control you referred to it a little bit differently in the context of Statin right um so a kid comes in who's obese or slightly overweight right it's like I don't know what to do I'm trying to eat better exercise or a person comes in and says hey i' I've had a really hard time getting that last 20 9 PBS off for so many years will you prescribing those zic so the short answer is number one I'm retired so I'm not prescribing anything but let's let's let's go with there the data show that gp1 analoges like um semaglutide and now tepati which is uh Lily's version uh Manjaro is the diabetes version Z bound is the Obesity version the same way that OIC is the diabetes version for um uh novonordisk and woi is the Obesity version so they're all glp1 they're all G gp1 analog they synthesized in a lab it looks like glp1 smells like glp1 acts like G1 when injected tepati the uh Lily one actually has a dual function it uh binds to the Gip receptor so it might have double duty and the data show that it's actually even slightly more effective at Weight Loss than the Nova Nordisk version so we'll be seeing a shift in terms of uh uh consumer preference soon no doubt but here's the thing you look at the data one year uh of treatment 16% weight loss now that sounds great and I'm not saying it's bad and people are not craving food all the time is that because people are feeling full longer right so they're eating less they're eating less this is the calorie in calorie out model they're eating less and so they are losing weight I'm not arguing that and they might be craving alcohol less According to some recent reports yeah well we can go there for a minute too in a second here's the problem when you look at that 16% weight loss as you just said when you put people in a dexa scanner they have lost equal amounts of fat and muscle now is it good to lose muscle no it is not good ask any little old lady who breaks her hip if she wishes she had a little bit more muscle or somebody who died had lost a lot of muscle because they weren't offsetting the weight loss with resistance training or some other form of exercise and the amount of food that they can eat in order to maintain that weight to put it in scientific terms sucks and um you know we mentioned Peter AA earlier okay in outli he's made it very clear that sarcopenia lack of muscle mass is one of the driver of mortality so losing muscle is not a uh a a good idea but you lose equal amounts of fat and muscle what else causes loss of equal amounts of fat and muscle starvation in fact the reason that all these glp1 analogues work is because you stop eating starvation yeah just like the Heil mus the he monsters look pretty chubby to me well ask another heila monster I did but but unfortunately whatever answer it provided was not interpretable indeed the point is that starvation is not so good and if you think about why it's working it's reducing gastric the rate of gastric emptying all right well it turns out that that's the reason for its side effects the reduction in gastric emptying that's why you get nausea that's why you get vomiting that's why you get pancreatitis and most importantly now gastroparesis your stomach turns to Stone and you can't move any food through your intestine at all and worse yet when you stop the medicine the gastroparesis doesn't get better this is not a good idea this is like the opposite of the yerbamate induced effect which has a sort of prolax gastri camine maybe glp1 agonism gosh okay so it's obvious why people who've struggled to lose weight like it especially if their struggle to lose weight was at least in their mind the consequence of being hungry all the time and needing to eat more or was it because of the reward and you know their dependence because in fact yes uh uh uh these gop1 analoges reduce reward and that's one of the reasons why they've noticed that you know thing uh uh reduction in alcohol consumption uh as well and that that sounds like a good thing except there are also numerous cases now of major depressive disorder in response to these drugs so it's almost like an alone or something for the treatment of addiction which sometimes can be useful but but the attempting to remove the the um the amplitude of that reward signal I mean a lot on paper it makes sense but the but it doesn't always play in practice it doesn't play out that's right and so I'm going to refer you now to an old uh literature that uh was from 2006 there was a drug that was approved in Europe called raniban okay a trade name ACC complia and it was approved in uh Europe for weight loss and it was pretty good at Weight Loss it caused about 20% weight loss it also caused severe depression and 21 suicides so it's no longer available because it was the an yeah it was from the European market never approved in the United States and the reason this happened was because this was the anti-marijuana drug this was the anti- munchies drug this was an endoc canabo antagonist well when you reduce reward you also reduce your desire to live and that's why this concern about reduction in alcohol consumption we've already seen major depressive disorder in patients receiving OIC so are we going to see the same thing play out as we did for rabant I'm worried about it or fenfen well fenfen didn't have um uh no it was cardiac it was cardiac right we had cardiac problems uh due to the fenfluramine because of the uh serotonin 1B receptor agonism right I'm just referring to the fact that these these quote unquote Blockbuster drugs for obesity they tend to follow a contour of you know very promising very exciting a lot of people losing weight suicides or very promising a lot of people losing weight um cardiac issues very promising losing weight and now you're saying the stomach turns to Stone sound sounds so biblical uh well indeed so that's the question and then finally we can really talk biblical if everyone in America who qualified for OIC got it that would be 2.1 trillion to the Health Care system which is currently at 4.1 trillion so that would be a greater than 50% increase in health care costs okay at 13300 a month conversely if we just got sugar consumption down to USDA guidelines by basically you know putting some limits on how much added sugar the food industry can put into any given product like Froot Loops we could reduce weight by 29% and save $3.0 trillion so so we'd get better weight loss and we'd save $5.1 trillion which makes more sense to the US government well earlier you were alluding to government uh big food big Pharma relationships I mean there's a huge win here for whoever's manufacturing these um gp1 analoges indeed um but the question is who's paying the tab well we are um now the question is why can't the government see that and the answer is because the government's on the Dole too because the government uh uh through tariffs on USM made Foods okay grosses um $ 56 billion a year so they're a player they're not just a regulator they're an actor to play devil Devil's Advocate a little bit listen I'm going to be the last person to step in and try and defend government as a as a unified body I'm not qualified to do that but you could see how it if you looked at it like Checkers instead of Chess you'd say okay here's a drug that's going to allow many millions of people to reduce their overall body weight overall body weight is a risk factor for a number of things um and there will be savings on the back end as a consequence of that weight loss I mean so that's the Checker version right the chess version is how you're describing it and I think that um I mean clearly people in government are are well well most some perhaps are smart enough to play chess not Checkers or to at least understand it but there's very little incentive for the chess model so um what would quote unquote solve this problem is the same thing that happened to fenfen or this Ro Roman which is if suddenly there's a major issue with the drug then everyone stops taking it and traditionally that's how it's gone it sounds like these gp1 analoges are going to make it through the shoot though yeah I mean there is a very clear downside to these medicines on the other hand you know there's an upside and so I'm not sad that these medicines exist I'm for them I'm not against them I'm for them for the right patient and right now it's not the right patient who's getting them just like the statins so what if somebody who's taking uh one of these analoges makes it a point to do resistance training and here you know you mentioned bodybuilders earlier I'm not I'm not suggesting they become bodybuilders but we now know and I think Peter Tia and others would agree that everybody should be doing some form of muscle loss offsetting resistance exercise agree at least past you know their reaching their adult height or something you know I know there are those that say weight training doesn't blunt your height but anyway let's just say that from early 20s onward doing especially if you're on these medicines right in order to maintain muscle mess right so that's a different picture right um people are drinking less alcohol again I'm playing devil's advocate here here um so if we look at these these compounds not in a vacuum but okay the person who's been carrying that extra 30 lb is now only carrying a few extra pounds of adapost tissue they've lost a lot of muscle but now they feel well enough to exercise um the depression part worries me yeah but anyway I'm just I'm just trying to round the Contour of it what we've seen in children you know cuz that's who I took care of was that often they needed a jump start okay and were different ways to get him to jump start stomach stapling well that's not jump start that's but that was what a lot of people did I know I have a friend he's he was and sadly still is really big and he always talked about the stomach stapling like if I could just get 50 pounds down quickly than I could exercise but exercise is painful this kind of thing and and sadly he's he's continued to maintain or creep up in in a very excessive weight and that's the point is you know that this concept of jump start actually it if you're only doing it yourself doesn't really work and the question is why is his weight creeping up if he's had the stomach stapling the answer is cuz he's a sugar addict yeah he's definitely addicted to the super big gulp soda and if you drink your calories it doesn't really matter does it no and and he's got such terrible psoriasis and joint pain and all this that the prospect of exercising is like a you might as well tell him to to like flap his wings and go to Mars you know fructose is was a driver of immune dysfunction if he got off you can tell him from me if he got off the sugar his psoriasis would get better his weight would get better his arthritis would get better and he could have then that jump start this is a perfect example to bridge to the brain component of all this because I've long wondered based on what I understand about neural circuitry and neuroplasticity I know we share in this knowledge that at some point carrying a lot of adapost tissue means that the brain sort of represents the body differently I mean we know there are these these somatotopic M maps of self um you know but that the neural Machinery in the hypothalamus sure which is responsible for Motivated States Etc but but also just the entire mapping of the self y changes in other words if one is fat long enough MH that it becomes increasingly hard to get to a a healthy weight because of the way the neural circuitry is impacted it basically remaps to maintain that that um fat person not necessarily even just at the level of appetite but just in terms of what do you what do big animals do I had a bulldog that weigh 90 PB Bulldog Mastiff he was very economical with his movement right he's extremely powerful he could run at least in when he was younger but if he could be still he was still as opposed to certain smaller animals that are like paripe right because because he was leptin resistant M so leptin as we talked about briefly is um the hormone that tells your brain you've had enough if you are leptin sensitive you are happy to burn if you are leptin resistant your brain thinks you're starving and if your brain thinks you're starving it's going to affect your behavior in two ways it's going to make you want to eat and it's also going to make you want to conserve because the goal is to try to increase the leptin levels in order to overcome that resistance which of course you can never do because all you're GNA do is lay down more fat and make more leptin that makes so much sense because leptin comes from the adapost tisue exactly so that leptin resistance is what you have to be able to break through you have to fix the leptin sensitivity well what's the driver of the leptin resistance insulin insulin inhibits leptin signaling and it does it at three separate places in the palcy neur on the proopiomelanocortin neuron in the hypothalamus it does it at um irs2 insulin receptor substrate 2 it does it at sock 3 suppressor of cocine signaling three and it does it at pip 3 phospha andosol triphosphate those three separate arms of the uh uh leptin receptor are all basically put to sleep by high insulin insulin blocks leptin signaling so the higher the insulin goes the more more your brain thinks you're starving and the more your brain thinks you're starving the hungrier you get and the less you want to move so the gluttony and sloth that we've been talking about all all you know podcast is really biochemical it is secondary to this phenomenon of insulin blocking leptin signaling you got to fix that first get the insulin down any way you can and the best way get rid of the refined carbohydrate and sugar that's where you start it makes so much sense it works too how about that that's always good it is I once heard you say I think it was in a conversation with Peter AA on his podcast and this really stuck in my mind that when a person consumes glucose that it activates a number of different brain sides you know neurons loving glucos MH but that when one ingests fructose that it preferentially activates neurons in the reward pathway that's right at maybe seven times the the magnitude or or something like that well uh glucose activates the basil ganglia uh this is work from walner hous and uh Switzerland and also Eric stce at or S mov planning and execution exactly okay um fructose basically stimulates the nucleus the reward center it is just like heroin Just Like Cocaine just like uh nicotine it activates the reward center it doesn't do anything for the basil ganglia so it is addictive anything that stimulates the reward center in the extreme is addictive so we have chemical addictions heroin cocaine nicotine alcohol sugar we have behavioral addictions shopping gambling internet gaming social media pornography doesn't matter they all ulate dopamine in the reward center and in the extreme they are all addictive so the question is if you are addicted is that personal responsibility well it's uh a very um it's a question I think about a lot because uh I know a lot of people in the addiction recovery Community um both from the treatment end and the addict end yeah and there's always comes down to this question when somebody is suffering from an addiction of any kind and they're resistant to getting treatment if you look at it them as a as being sick at least in that moment is a sick person in the best or worst or at least diminished position to guide their own treatment so for instance somebody with dementia would you ask them do you want to go see a neurologist you might ask them that but are they the best person to make that decision well this is the problem so this is this is where personal responsibility falls down so personal responsibility as you know we talked about four criteria have to be met none of them are met that's first issue second one is a little bit shall we say cheek gear who invented personal responsibility any idea I'm definitely going to get this this one wrong yeah you're gonna get this one wrong are you ready goad I don't know the tobacco industry the notion of personal responsibility they invented it there was no personal responsibility on until tobacco in 1962 because they were getting killed on the science and they needed to invent another reason for you to smoke in fact there's a paper that came out Dorfman at all that looked at the New York Times And The Washington Post and they did a entire lit search of the entire of uh you know the all of the output of those two newspapers for decades to look for the term person responsibility and the very first time it was ever mentioned was 1962 and it didn't pick up in speed until 1986 which was the same year as calone V liot in this at the Supreme Court which basically said that the U you know that uh uh the cigarette industry was um was guilty of uh of um applying people with an addictive substance so this is is very specifically industry-driven and we have the data to prove it amazing well I wonder along the lines of personal responsibility um given that many listeners this conversation are going to be thinking about their own food intake and food choices that of their children and other relatives that we could play a little a little uh not a game but a little rapid is fire cu Q and A never done this before in this podcast but I think it's particularly appropriate for a discussion like this that Wicks out into so many areas and I absolutely will invite you back and perhaps along with um Lissa eel to talk about some of the exciting work you guys are doing because there's so much we could cover but people are going to wonder in a very practical sense whether or not they should or should not be consuming certain things and I know you're not the food police I'm not the food police and I'm not a cop and I do believe people should are should be in choice about the matters but I also believe that because you're a guest on the podcast and you're highly informed and and I've done clinical work and research for so many years in this area and you have such a clear stance on the role of big food and and we really really appreciate your honesty and directness but not you'd be willing to provide a comment about couple of different terms that I'll throw out and if you choose to say really nothing to say about that fine that would be a quick pass so um here we go um and we covered a little bit of this earlier but um fruit in whole form so um has fructose but has fiber so thumbs up thumbs sideways or thumbs down for fruit consumption fruit is fine fruit juice is not great thank you white rice versus brown rice and among the white Rices the sticky rice um and the Rices with added sugars which you find in in a lot of um in a lot of restaurants brown rice because of the fiber white rice polished you know number one all the vitamin B1 gone and of course a much larger glucose Excursion that glycemic index thing which of course I hate is it's glycemic load that matters and that is a very high glycemic load so brown rice so brown rice is better than white rice yes okay in a meaningful way in a meaningful way okay um earlier you mentioned tomato sauce I love tomato sauce that's made from just tomato can Tom so is are most tomato sauces filled with sugar perfect our little uh recommendation engine looked at this question and it turns out that only 10% of the available tomato sauces out on the market don't have added sugar so you have to know which ones well you can look yourself or you can look up perfect and it will tell you which ones you can buy if people chose to consume bread which many people do uh is there a way to just across the board without just baking your own or see or looking at the ingredients list to make a better choice is it like sourdough tend to have less sugar than blank um well sourdough has been fermented so it will have actually consumed some of the sugar so it would be a better choice but really the best choice is the highest fiber breads now if you look at a wheat berry it is 25% fiber the husk is 25% of the weight of that wheat berry that means that the carbohydrate to fiber ratio of a wheat berry is 3: one so a good bread should have a carbohydrate to fiber ratio of somewhere between 3:1 to 5:1 tops anything above that means that they've stripped the fiber away so that's something you could do but the easier way is to actually look it up on perfect you mentioned meat and meat sourcing um egg and chicken sourcing earlier maybe we just revisit that um meat fish and eggs uh thumbs up thumbs sideways thumbs down or it depends it depends it depends on where the meat came from it depends on whether it was pasture raised depends on whether it's organic or not if the uh animal was injected with antibiotics stay away from it because those antibiotics are in the meat they're going to basically sterilize your gut and then the bad bacteria are going to take over we haven't really talked much about the microbiome today but that's a whole podcast all by itself well we can touch on it a little bit more uh F low sugar fermented foods thumbs up thumbs sideways thumbs down fermented foods short chain fatty acids all good what are your favorite sources of fermented foods I like kimchi yeah I like kimchi too I like some of the live sourkrauts yeah that's also good but with the right you know the right uh AC accouterment um the one thing I would be uh uh careful about is yogurt okay so there are yogurts with live cultures and there are whole lot of yogurts with dead cultures and if it's a yogurt with dead cultures it's kind of irrelevant and the chances are they've actually covered up the sourness with sugar so Comm you know large commercially available yogurt be very very careful okay if it's a you know Artisan yogurt you know made by a you know people you know or trust you know that's a very different story um you know yogurts with live cultures intermittent fasting do you practice it and what do you think about it um I don't practice it but I am for it for the right patient turns out who's the right patient the patient with liver fat because the reason it works is because it gives the liver a chance to basically burn off the fat that it's stored zero calorie soda got it it's definite no and I don't even have to ask about sugary soda because that's uh that that's basically just poison in a can food combinations uh I have a feeling I know what your answer is but the glycemic index which we know your feelings on now um asserts that if you combine some fat with a sugary like like eating ice cream you have a more blunted insulin response than if you were to eat pure sugar of equivalent calories but um what are your thoughts on food combinations as a way to blunt the insulin response food combinations are great if there's some Fiber associated with it so it comes back to fiber again and by the way and by the way uh I you know full disclosure I am the chief medical officer of a fiber company what is it it is called biolumin and it is a proprietary fiber it is a uh microcellulose sponge seven microns in diameter so the size of a red blood cell you swallow it it goes your stomach it expands 70 fold over its original size and so it'll give you a feeling of fullness because it's taking up space in the stomach but more importantly when it expands the nooks and the crannies in the sponge become available and embedded in those nooks and crannies are a set of proprietary hydrogels soluble fiber which sequester glucose fructose sucrose simple starches and render them unavailable for early absorption in the dadum thus reducing the glucose response reducing the insulin response protecting the liver and moving it through the intestin so that microbiome can chew it up for its own purposes feeding the gut we can reduce glucose absorption by 36% fructose absorption by 38% sucrose absorption by 40% simple starch absorption by 9% and increase short chain fatty acid production by 60% without an increase in gas when do people take this with meals okay so B it it comes as a sachche u one teaspoon sprinkle it on your food or take it as a you know in a drink you know just mix it in and Slug it down and then eat breakfast lunch or dinner and it will basically act like you ate real food it will turn processed food into real food in the intestine and we have clinical trial data that demonstrates that is it available as a commercial it is available it is called Munch Munch now I hate that name I didn't make it up well get maret your marketing team sucks but the product sounds amazing um so biol. Tech great thank you for that sorry Munch Munch marketing team but you got a Munch Munch to a new product name um but it sounds like a a very interesting product and it actually answered my next question which was about um fiber supplements fiber is good but there are two kinds of fiber there's soluble and there's insoluble they are not the same so soluble is what goes into Fiber One bars you know that psyllium um inulin uh um uh uh pectin like what holds jelly together um that's good I'm not saying it's bad but you need the insoluble fiber the cellulose the stringy stuff in celery the cardboard if you will um together they form this gel that we talked about earlier if you only consume the soluble fiber which is what the food industry will add to to food because the insoluble fiber is not missible if you only add the soluble fiber back you're not getting the benefits of the entire fiber complement earlier when talking about the Nova System and uh how most all of our Foods so n let's say I know it was 7 to 10% let's say 95% let's a on the side of better uh 95% of our food should come from Nova System class one or class two Foods or three or three okay staying away from those um Nova class 4 Foods could you give us some examples of Nova class one and class two Foods um just broad broadly speaking okay Nova class one is any food without a label period if you see a label on a food it's a warning label well there's ground ground beef has a label okay so that's well does it so you're talking about Apple well when I buy it it has a label I'm asking this because people are going to wonder so well it does have a nutrition facts label is there a nutrition facts label on a thing of ground beef I buy that that uh ground beef where I consume venison um where if you flip it over it says how many calories how many protein so there's a label um but but it's just B for venison okay then that's class one okay egg egg is class one so and then of course fruit apples orange okay so it doesn't matter if it has it has a name a name tag as long as it it doesn't have an ingredi label got it real food does not need a label it's only if they did something to it that it needs a label so you have to look at every label as a warning label now the problem with the label is it only tells you what's in the food what you really need to know is what's been done to the food because it's the ultr processed food that's the problem they don't want to tell you that that's secret okay secret from a proprietary standpoint but also secret because if you knew what they did to it you wouldn't need it you would never buy it and they don't want you to know so they only tell you what's in the food that's not what's important it's what's been done to the food that's important and that's why this Nova class 4 is so important and that's why perfect is so important because it'll do the work for you okay we'll definitely um provide links to all of these so if you could pick one thing to recommend to people that want to improve their health get rid of the sugar okay period very clear that's number one number two go for a walk the exercise piece yeah go for a walk and if you could recommend one thing that the general public can do to try and um assist in this advocacy for not redefining but actually clearly defining what is food and what isn't and making people aware um at the level of policy and change and school lunches I mean if there were one thing what can we do I mean I I you've clearly activated my neurons surrounding like the the set of problems that exist and the paths to correct them but should we be writing to our Congress people should we be um getting angry at hospitals because they've got all these fast food machines and that the cafeteria food is like is like is like illness promoting at UCSF we've gotten rid of all sugar beverages we have the healthy beverage initiative so no Coke machines at UC No Coke machines at ucss wow Stanford check that out cuz you know people always send me pictures of the of the coke machines in the school of medicine I'm like listen I didn't put them there but I I I uh we have to model for the public you know I mean where where was the first place that smoking was banned hospitals okay because we knew so if you get rid of the you know uh uh soda if if you get rid of the sugared soda at the hospital you're telling people something so yeah I think that every hospital and really every public venue in America needs to clear out the junk so post photos of junk that are supposed to be in uh in health promoting institutions and um I guess we're trying to cancel junk food we're trying to cancel junk food I'm pretty opposed to cancel culture but here we go we're going to cancel um marvelous it's actionable it's straightforward it's low cost low time investment zero cost um very low time investment so thank you for that and look up eat real because we're doing it for your kids so you need to help support it any school district in America can do it so what do we do we have a business model whereby the uh Food Services director um either purchases or rents a dilapidated Factory in the center of the district repurposes it into a food preparation facility they can make 27 to 30,000 meals a day okay with a you know Skeleton Crew and then they and and you control what's in it and because you're buying in volume it actually reduces the cost so it's cheaper than buying it from Cisco or aromar or sedexo or wherever and then you farm it out via you know truck or bus to all the different schools so every kid gets a hot meal made from scratch each day and we can solve this problem can't help but ask this one last question for people that want to cut out sugar which you clearly stated is the most important thing to do for one's Health how do we know how much sugar is in something I so should people be looking at labels and just looking for how much sugar how much carbohydrate or could we even go so far as to say if it says um high fructose corn syrup then it's it's on the nfly list don't don't don't eat it so the problem the problem is that there are 262 names for sugar and the food industry uses all of them and the reason they use all of them is because they can include a different sugar as number five number six number seven number eight number nine on the list when you add it up it becomes number one they hide it in plain sight and they do it on purpose now do I expect everybody to memorize all 262 names no of course not can you figure it out yourself well the answer is no unless they have the line where it says added sugars if it says added sugars it is either sucrose or high fructose corn syrup no one's adding lactose okay that's not Happ or glucose they're not even adding glucose because glucose isn't that sweet glucose is not that interesting you don't see people going around chugging Kos syrup do you okay that's glucose who cares yeah might be good in the Molasses cookie but that's it all right so it's fructose so you need to know what's been added so if it says added sugars that's a good place to start no greater than one teaspoon per serving no greater than four gram per serving of added sugars anything greater than that leave at the store and aim for those Nova type type one for nov aim for Nova types one two and three and if you don't know whether it's Nova type one two or three you can use perfect and if you don't look at that then go look at the nutrition facts label and anything that has more than four ingredients is Nova class 4 Robert lustig thank you so much you've provided such an incredible education in nutritional biochemistry the processing of fat protein carbohydrate sugar fructose in particular the clear detriments of consuming fructose on so many different organ systems I love love love that you separated out food science Nutrition and metabolic health or self that's just I that's a you know that's a gazillion dollar delineation for people to understand and to shape their understanding of all the information that's out there and bends into these different categories you've given us so many actionable tools um new conceptual Frameworks youve given us a real tour to force today in a just oh so clear language so I want to thank you I've learned a ton and um and I know everyone else has as well and if people have questions they can of course put them in the comment section on YouTube that's the best place we'll provide links to all the the companies and uh websites that that you referenced and some of your other work and listen I just I'm so so grateful that you exist and that you've done the work that you've done and and your passion and your advocacy for health is um it's just oh so clear so thank you so much so I want I want to thank you and the reason I want to thank you is first of all you know inviting me that's nice you know that's good but the reason is because people need to understand science I am completely in agreement with you the public needs to understand science they listen to you because you number one provide the science and number two you don't talk down to them you treat them as equals and that is truly remarkable and so I want to thank you for your service well you're most welcome it's a labor of love and um I think it was the great Max delbrook that said uh when teaching assume zero knowledge and infinite intelligence and I do believe that humans are infinitely intelligent although sometimes as a whole we mask asket um people deserve the the knowledge so thank you so much for sharing that knowledge today and let's absolutely have you back my pleasure thank you thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Robert lustig about nutrition and how sugar impacts the health of our brain and body to learn more about Dr lustig's work and to find links to the many books that he's written on this and other topics please see the show note captions if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a five-star review if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guesss you'd like me to consider on the hubman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube I do read all the comments please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast not so much on today's episode but on many previous episodes of The huberman Lab podcast we discuss supplements while supplements aren't necessary for everybody many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like improving sleep for hormone support and for improving Focus to learn more about the supplements discussed on the hubman Lab podcast go to live momentus spelled o us so Liv mous.com huberman if you're not already following me on social media I am huberman lab on Instagram X formerly called Twitter LinkedIn Facebook and threads and at all of those places I discuss science and science related tools some of which over collaps with the content of the hubman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the content covered on the hubman Lab podcast so again it's huberman lab on all social media channels if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network newsletter our neural network newsletter is a zeroc cost newsletter that comes out every month it includes podcast summaries as well as protocols in the form of short PDFs of maybe just one to three pages where I list out the specific protocols for instance for improving dopamine functioning or for improving your sleep or for deliberate cold exposure deliberate heat exposure or Fitness protocols and on and on all of which are presented in brief fashion very direct just the protocols listed out again completely zero cost to sign up you simply go to huberman lab.com go to the menu function scroll down to newsletter and enter your email and I should point out that we do not share your email with anybody thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Robert lustic and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 162 ---
Video ID: LRM5LutB538
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LRM5LutB538
Title: LIVE EVENT Q&A: Dr. Andrew Huberman Question & Answer in Chicago, IL
Published: 2023-12-13 13:00:25 UTC
Description:
Recently I had the pleasure of hosting a live event in Chicago, IL. This event was part of a lecture series called The Brain Body Contract. My favorite part of the evening was the question & answer period, where I had the opportunity to answer questions from the attendees of each event. Included here is the Q&A from our event in Chicago, IL at The Chicago Theatre.

We'll be hosting four live events in Australia in February 2024. Limited tickets remain for our show in Melbourne on February 10, 2024, and our second show in Sydney at the Aware Super Theatre on February 18, 2024. For tickets and event details, please visit https://www.hubermanlab.com/events.

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

Timestamps
00:00:00 Introduction
00:02:42 What Is Your Best Advice to Keep My Brain Healthy in Old Age?
00:07:07 How Can I Optimize Sleep While Working 24 Hour Shifts?
00:10:17 How Does Hypnosis Therapy Work?
00:17:15 Psychedelics in Clinical Therapy
00:30:23 How Has Your Podcast Changed Your Life?
00:35:21 What Do You Feel Is the Next Big Thing in the Health Space?
00:44:31 Daylight Saving Time: Is It Worth the Productivity Trade-Off?
00:46:34 Enhancing Neuroplasticity: Strategies for a 19-Year-Old College Student
00:50:17 How Can We Transform the American Education System to Be More Effective?
00:54:06 Conclusion

#HubermanLab #Science

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English
ANDREW HUBERMAN: Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [MUSIC PLAYING] Recently, the Huberman Lab hosted a live event at The Chicago Theater in Chicago, Illinois. The event consisted of a lecture entitled "The Brain Body Contract" followed by a question and answer session. We wanted to make sure that the question and answer session was available to everybody, regardless of who could attend in person. I also want to make sure to thank the sponsors of that event, which were AG1 and Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. One of the key things to getting a great night's sleep is to make sure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct, and that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3 degrees. And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3 degrees. With Eight Sleep, you can program the temperature of your sleeping environment in the beginning, middle, and end of your night. It has a number of other features, like tracking the amount of rapid eye movement and slow wave sleep that you get, things that are essential to really dialing in the perfect night's sleep for you. I've been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress cover for well over two years now, and it has greatly improved my sleep. I fall asleep far more quickly, I wake up far less often in the middle of the night, and I wake up feeling far more refreshed than I ever did prior to using an Eight Sleep mattress cover. If you'd like to try Eight Sleep, you can go to eightsleep.com to save $150 off their pod three cover. Eight Sleep currently ships to the USA, Canada, UK, select countries in the EU, and Australia. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman. AG1 is an all in one vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I've been taking AG1 since 2012, so I'm delighted that they sponsored the live event. The reason I started taking AG1, and the reason I still drink AG1 once or twice a day, is that it provides all of my foundational nutritional needs. That is, it provides insurance that I get the proper amounts of those vitamins, minerals, probiotics and fiber to ensure optimal mental health, physical health, and performance. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to drinkAG1.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They're giving away five free travel packs, plus a year's supply of vitamin D3 K2. Again, that's drinkAG1.com/huberman to claim that special offer. And now, without further ado, the question and answer session from our live event at The Chicago Theater in Chicago, Illinois. [MUSIC PLAYING] I turn 70 soon. What is your best advice to keep my brain healthy in old age? Terrific question. The advice I would give to you, as somebody about to reach 70, is the same advice I give to anybody, which is that, essentially, all of the things that improve cardiovascular health and perfusion of your bodily tissues are going to improve functionality of the brain. Because, of course, the brain is a rich consumer of fuel, requires very good portals to deliver those fuels, and the capillaries, micro capillaries and arteries, and so forth, need to be clean and clear. That's the big one. This is why I think the prescription now is that's generally accepted, and here I'm borrowing from my friend Peter Attia, but about 150, or maybe as much as 200 minutes of so-called zone 2 cardio per week, movement that you can just barely carry out a conversation, is going to be very useful. One thing that's often not discussed is that load bearing exercise of some sort is going to be better, provided your body can tolerate it, but you should do something that you can do consistently over those long durations without injuring yourself. But there's a very interesting literature about how load bearing movements actually generate the release of hormones, yes, hormones, from bone that actually cross the blood-brain barrier and may influence health of neurons in brain areas such as the hippocampus. And there, I'm extending from preclinical data in animals to humans, but there's some human data starting to emerge that that's true. It's also true, and there's a wonderful paper out just today or yesterday from Dr. Andy Galpin's lab and collaborators talking about how if you look at cognitive health, it's highly correlated with things that relate to strength. And that is not to say that you should just do strength training exercises but we know that all people, truly all people, should be doing some sort of resistance training two or three times per week. You know, and we know that grip strength and increasing asymmetry in grip strength between the two hands is one of the indicators of deficits in control from the brain out to the periphery, and it's correlated with cognitive decline. There's also some interesting data about how when the feet become floppy and kind of flaccid or the lack of ability to extend one's toes. I'm still working, I've been wearing this toe spreader thing. Has anyone tried those? Those hurt. Those hurt. I broke this foot a bunch of times. but I'll tell you when you get better at spreading your toes, it's really exciting. And it's really exciting for several reasons. It's really exciting because there's more stability in your feet. You can run and move and do things better without pain. But in addition to that, believe it or not, just as one of the first things that they're going to do when you come into this world is scrape the bottom of your foot and look for the Babinski reflex, which is a neural transmission reflex, as all reflexes are, but it's testing, essentially, the health of the nervous system. That over time, again, there are many correlates of dementia, many, many correlates of dementia, but an inability to finely control the extremities is certainly one of them. So strength training, cardiovascular training, these are kind of stereotyped answers for your question and, yet, those are really the prime movers against cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease. And then, of course, I'd be remiss if I didn't throw in something that was a little bit more edgy because that's what I do. There are interesting data about the use of drugs to increase acetylcholine transmission, right? I mean, I was visiting a Nobel Prize winner at Columbia to learn about his incredible work some years ago and saw that he chewed no fewer than five pieces of Nicorette gum, something I don't recommend, during this short meeting. And I said, what is this all about? And he said, well, you know, I don't smoke anymore because I don't want lung cancer. But he said nicotine is protective against Parkinson's and Alzheimer's. I was like, how can that be? And he said, well, you know, decreases in neuromodulation, dopamine, acetylcholine correlated with cognitive decline, keeping your brain sharp, and so on and so forth. So I'm not encouraging people to take nicotine. It increases blood pressure, vasoconstriction, but it's an interesting consideration some of the emerging cholinergic and dopaminergic drugs are ways to increase acetylcholine and dopamine are certainly intriguing. And I won't tell you who that person is but his name is Richard Axel. Next question. Yeah. How can I optimize sleep while working 24/7 hour shifts as a firefighter, 24 hours on 48 hours off? OK. And this probably also pertains to new parents, and it probably also pertains to anyone that's going through a particularly stressful time, where you're micro waking throughout the night, so not just firefighters. So what do we know? We know, based on really good data, that shift work is bad for us. It's just bad. We're a diurnal species. We're not nocturnal. But thank you, thank you, thank you, shift workers, because you essentially keep us all safe and make the world go round. And so we need you, and we want you healthy. So one of the main things is that you can make sure that you stay on the same sleep-wake schedule, excuse me, for at least two weeks. It's the swing shift that's really the worst. You can tell your boss I said that. And if they won't agree, and you're doing this 24 hour on 24 hour off, there are a couple of things that are really important. First of all, the main way to wake up your nervous system, even though it might not feel like a triple espresso is going to be that light exposure to the eyes. And if you can't get it from sunlight is going to be from any bright, artificial light. I'm not a huge proponent of the daylight simulators. They're very expensive. You can simply buy a 900 lux led far more inexpensively. I don't have any relationship to any company that sells these but you can find them on Amazon or wherever you happen to prefer to purchase things. Or you can just get really close to a bright light. Anytime you're trying to wake up, even if you don't feel that it helps you wake up very much, mostly for the melatonin suppression, because bright light will very acutely suppress melatonin. And then the real question from shiftworkers always seems to be, should I catch up on sleep or is that going to be problematic? Should I just stay up into the next cycle? And the answer there is a little bit nuanced, but the best answer I can give across the board is, if this is a pattern that you're going to be in regularly, over say months or years, then get whatever sleep you can. Get whatever sleep you can. If it's something that you're doing somewhat acutely, like you're traveling to Europe and you're just going to force yourself to stay up a day and a half then, in that case, I would say, no need to get the maximum amount of sleep. Just try and stay with the local schedule. We have an entire episode about shift work that somehow maybe didn't get as much recognition as it should have for shift workers, and we'll try and get it out in better form. We don't always succeed in top carding things in a way that gets them out to the most people. One thing I will say is an opportunity to announce that our website, hubermanlab.com, is completely revamped so it's highly searchable. It will take you to exact timestamps, and now you can segregate out timestamps from newsletters, from all this stuff. So thanks to a lot of effort by my amazing team, you can now navigate that site to real precision. So if you want to say ADHD, Adderall, kids, yes, no, for instance, it will take you to precise timestamps that will address those issues. Next question, please. How does hypnosis therapy work? Well, this is a very interesting topic to me because my colleague, Associate Chair of Psychiatry at Stanford, David Spiegel, is a world expert in hypnosis and its neural underpinnings and its use for clinical applications. His father was a hypnotist, also a psychiatrist. And when people hear hypnotism, they think of stage hypnotism and being up on stage and doing things you don't want to in front of other people. But really, it's when we're talking about clinical applications or wellness applications of hypnosis, we're talking about self-directed hypnosis. I really wish there was a better name, because I don't think hypnosis is going to advance very far as a field, frankly, because everyone thinks hypnosis. And it would be like if psychedelics were just called drugs, right? We were taught in the 80s that drugs are bad, and that your brain on drugs looks like an omelet, and that's bad. And if you like omelets, they're still bad. And drugs of abuse are bad. And, actually, I hope we can talk briefly about psychedelics at some point, because I do think there's a little bit of a runaway train around the topic of psychedelics now. I think we need to be very careful how we approach that entire landscape. But hypnosis essentially works by allowing someone to place their own brain into this very unique state. Earlier, we were talking about neuroplasticity, and we talked about the fact that neuroplasticity involves intense focus followed by deep rest in the form of deep sleep or non-sleep deep rest, maybe even Rick Rubining it and just kind of like laying there. Hypnosis is different because hypnosis is a state in which your focus is very narrow, the context is very narrow, but you're very, very relaxed. So maybe the Rubin example of being brain active and body very still is a bit more like hypnosis, to be fair. Why would it be the case that David Spiegel and his dad have literally a tool that is approved by the Psychiatric Association, the major American Psychiatric Association, where they can figure out how hypnotizable you are by having look up and try and close your eyelids while continuing to look up, the so-called Spiegel eye roll test. Sounds pretty wacky, right? This is like TikTok level wacky. Well, the reason is you have cranial nerves, so they sit more or less near your neck, that allow you to direct your focus, your eyes, upward, and then you have cranial nerves that have your eyes go down and the ones that the cranial nerves that drive your eyes up are associated with alertness and eyes open. No surprise. And the cranial nerves that are associated with pointing your eyes down and closing your eyelids are associated with, what, with drowsiness, sleep, and lack of alertness. There's sort of a push-pull in the autonomic nervous system. And Spiegel, Spiegel's daddy and him, figured out, because they're geniuses, that if somebody can maintain upward gaze while closing their eyelids, two things happen. One, you'll see the whites of their eyes, and it's pretty creepy. Two, that means they're highly hypnotizable, because that is a reflection of the probability that they can enter a brain state in which they are both very awake and very relaxed. Pretty cool. Now, if that sounds kind of wacky, because you're just looking at the periphery, keep in mind, that one of the primary entry points for diagnosing concussion is to shine a light in one eye and have that pupil constrict and then see whether or not the other pupil constricts, the so-called consensual pupillary reflex. Although, technically, and I've been bothered by this from day one, it should be called the non-consensual pupil reflex, because the other eye doesn't have a choice if everything's working. [AUDIENCE LAUGHING] In any case, if you have a hard hit to the head, you'll see that you shine light in one eye, the pupil constricts, and the other one stays really dilated. And then you go, OK, get this person to the emergency room because there's been a severing of the connections between the two sides of the brain. So looking in the eyes and trying to deduce what might be happening more centrally within the caverns of the skull and the brain is not a new thing. It is a primary diagnostic tool in neurology. It's also how your parents knew that you were taking drugs when you came in the door because your pupils were like that big, and that reflects a difference in autonomic arousal. And, basically, stimulants, as, most dilate their pupils. This is also why the story about belladonna, people intentionally dilating their pupils to trick people into thinking that they were attracted to them. I've thought about this one a lot, too. It's like not a precursor to good relationship. It's like someone's using their physiology to pretend that they're attracted so the other person thinks that they're attracted so that they might become attracted. Anyway, it's a recipe for failure, almost as bad as most of the dating apps. Well, I wouldn't know. I'm not one them, but from what I hear. OK. So where were we? Hypnosis. When you are in a state of elevated attention but very relaxed, guess what, neuroplasticity occurs much faster because you're essentially marrying the two states that are normally divorced, which are heightened levels of attention first and then deep rest. You're essentially putting the nervous system into a more, I wouldn't call it hypoplastic state, but a more plastic state. And for people that are highly hypnotizable, the success rates at, for instance, smoking cessation, pain relief, are pretty impressive. Spiegel Lab has published a number of these. So I think self hypnosis is a very interesting tool. I just hope that they rename it so that it stands a chance of getting off the ground. I mean, one of the things that you learn as a public facing educator is that what things are called has a great impact on whether or not they achieve any kind of use in the world. Hence, why I decided to swallow the difficult pill of partially renaming yoga nidra as non-sleep deep rest. I don't like to do that. Yoga nidra has more than 1,000 year history. But when people hear yoga nidra, unless they are very open minded, they hear magic carpet. They hear levitation, and it's unfortunate, and that's not how I feel. But for years, I talked about yoga nidra, it's so cool. It's like a sleep state but it's-- they're like, yeah, like yoga nidra. OK. But if you come from a culture where that's discussed, they're all about it. And so non-sleep deep rest, you know, I felt like, all right, leave my name out of it. You know, I'll be dead eventually. I mean, I'm in this line of advisors, right? I'm like approaching 50. I'm like, I'm winning in my lineage. But should I be fortunate enough to live past bullet cancer or car crash far enough, then NSDR hopefully will persist, and I don't need a piece of it. It's just the hope is that people will learn to put themselves into brain states that can be adaptive for them so it'd be nice if someone could come up with something other than hypnosis. I think Spiegel would agree. Super interested in psychedelics as medicine to be done with somebody with experience. Worried about unlocking mental health conditions. Yeah. You should be. What does the research say, and what are your thoughts? OK. Barbed wire question, we like that. Psychedelics, well, let's just back up a little bit and acknowledge one thing that's more important than psychedelics or anything else when it comes to rewiring the brain, which is that, ultimately, rewiring of the brain is about shifts in neuromodulators, dopamine, serotonin, epinephrine, norepinephrine, acetylcholine. And it's no coincidence that SSRIs, Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors, have been one of the major entry points for attempts to treat things like depression over the last 20-30 years or more. When I was in college, that's when the book Listening to Prozac came out. But prior to that, there's a long history of drugs, prescription drugs, in that case, to change levels of neuromodulators, like serotonin or acetylcholine or dopamine, in an attempt to cure or treat a disease. But keep in mind, despite the varied success of SSRIs, a topic unto itself, that there's a strong belief, and there has been for a long time, that, if SSRIs worked it wasn't because the depressed brain is deficient in serotonin, but rather because increasing serotonin offered the opportunity to increase neuroplasticity. So there's a different way of thinking about it, and that's a segue for saying that when you say psychedelics, that's a broad category of drugs. Nowadays, people even lump ketamine into that. Although, technically, it's not a psychedelic. But the sort of classic, if you will, psychedelics are LSD, Lysergic Acid Diethylamide, and psilocybin, aka mushrooms. Although, it comes in other sources, as well. The major effect of psilocybin is to stimulate a particular serotonin receptor which has elevated density in particular brain areas. And indeed, there are many recent clinical trials, many, let's say 12 to 20 good sized clinical trials done in diverse locations on the planet, many at Johns Hopkins and UCSF, some in Switzerland, showing that enhancing, and here you'll notice I'm using the mechanistic language, enhancing the transmission of the release of serotonin and activating particular serotonin receptors leads to an opportunity for more, what, neuroplasticity. Now, I say it that way not to add a bunch of word soup but because the real question is whether or not the experience that one has while under the influence of psychedelics is critical to the clinical outcome. Or a growing idea, just as a hypothesis, I think is equally interesting is that it's the serotonin itself and that the things you see, the things you hear, the things you experience are not relevant. Now, I have some experience with psychedelics. I had a bad time on psychedelics as a teenager. I was also pretty wayward youth. But I've had a bad trip on LSD. For years, I was scared that people were going to dose me with LSD after that. It was so bad. I think across the board, we can say, kids doing psychedelics just seems like a bad idea. Their brains are already hypoplastic. If you have a predisposition to bipolar type issues or schizophrenia, it can exacerbate those issues. And, certainly, if you don't have adequate support, in the form of somebody that can guide you through the sessions, as well as the presessions, which are not done with psychedelics, as well as the so-called integration afterwards, it can be a really slippery slope. I know examples of people really suffering in the aftermath of psychedelic journeys. Now, there are a few interesting points, as well, and it wouldn't be fair if I didn't say that several, if not many, individuals who have had so-called treatment resistant depression, at least in these clinical trials, have reported feeling far better after psilocybin therapy, but that psilocybin therapy was done with several presessions, then the psychedelic sessions then several after sessions. And it's not always the case that things turn out well. So I think it's early days. What is interesting, and I think important, is to recognize that psilocybin and the structure of psilocybin is very similar to serotonin itself, very similar, but it activates particular receptors. A lot of people don't realize how similar to serotonin it is, and that microdosing psilocybin, I should say the data on microdosing psilocybin, something that's increasingly popular, is not particularly compelling. It's not clear what it does. It's not clear if it's of any use. And I think the danger here is that we end up in a situation as we did with, frankly, with cannabis. And, by the way, I'm not somebody who demonizes cannabis. I think it has its uses for certain people, but very high THC concentration cannabis can be a problem, especially with people that have a predisposition to psychosis. And anyone that tells you that cannabis isn't addictive, just say, great, don't smoke weed for a week. Let's see how you do. Yeah. And let's go on a plane trip together. And how are you sleeping? And so I think the chronic cannabis users are starting to take note of some of the issues it causes but, again, there are some clinical applications. Now, when it comes to the high speed train psychedelics, like DMT, that's far less data available there. And then MDMA, assisted psychotherapy for the treatment of PTSD, there, the data I think are more robust, and I think we're likely to see legalization or at least decriminalization in the next few years. But keep in mind that MDMA is methylenedioxymethamphetamine. So for people that like dopaminergic states, it's a particularly compelling state to be in, so much so that they could overindulge in MDMA, and then there's the issues of purity, and I could do a five hour podcast on this right now. So I think the important point is approach with caution. Kids, absolutely not. And I think it's an exciting landscape, very exciting, and whereas a discussion like the one we just had would have gotten me fired a few years ago. I mean, Stanford has big programs now, a lot of philanthropy, federal grants, and many laboratories focused on the study of psychedelics. So I would say stay tuned. But keep in mind that increasing neuromodulator levels very acutely, whether or not it's with a prescription drug or whether or not it's with psychedelics, is really what lies at the heart of the recovery, the potential recovery, I should say, or the negative effects that happen to occur in anyone that embarks on the psychedelic journey. Do people who meditate and need less sleep than people who don't? Oh, that's interesting. Well, we know that from a study by Wendy Suzuki, who I believe, if NYU made the right choice, and I think they did is, now the Dean of Arts and Sciences at NYU. She ran a memory lab for a long time. She has data showing that even 10, I think it's 13, but as little as 10 minutes of meditation, so it'll be sitting still, breathing, focusing on your breathing, directing one's attention to third eye center, et cetera. We don't have a third eye. The pineal is thought to be the third eye. But I don't know why people say it's a light sensitive tissue deep in the brain but maybe that's why they call it the third eye. But, in any case, that type of practice has been shown to increase memory focus, aka learning, but there's some interesting footnotes in those papers, which point to the fact that when people meditate too close to bedtime, oftentimes, they have trouble sleeping because, basically, meditation is a focusing exercise. It's a perceptual exercise. I don't think of meditation is anything mystical. It's a self-directed shift in your perception to, what, to your interoception, to your internal state, as opposed to anything beyond the confines of your skin. There's nothing mystical about that. And then, in that state, your brain starts to generate patterns of activity that are distinct from when you're sharing your attention between what's going on internally and what's happening out in the world, right? I think we need to demystify what people have cloaked as mystical. And when I say cloaked, I don't think that the people that have meditated for thousands of years thought that there was anything mystical about it but, sometimes, what we experience there can feel mystical. So if you have trouble sleeping, I recommend doing some sort of non-sleep deep rest practice, like NSDR, aka yoga nidra. Although, those are different. NSDR generally lacks the intention piece. And the ones that I've put into the world, we've stripped away the intentions, and we've stripped away any kind of language that would make you think that there was some sort of, let's just say, like cultural aspect to it, which, again, is admittedly a bit unfair to the origin practice of yoga nidra. But the problem, again, is that in yoga nidra, you're going to be doing intentions and hearing language that for some people, not all, might divorce you from the wish to do it. In any case, non-sleep deep rest done at any time of day, but especially if you fall asleep in the middle of the night, is going to be useful for helping you fall back asleep. Whereas meditation, again, is going to enhance your level of focus. So I don't think it's a good practice if you have trouble sleeping. Now, to finally answer your question, if you meditate, can you afford to sleep less? My friend, Matt Walker, would say no. However, many of us can't sleep as much as we want to, and many of us are not like Matt, where we can wake up without an alarm clock. I'll just keep sleeping and sleeping, unless I went to bed at like 8:00. This is actually interesting. There's an asymmetry to your sleep needs. If you go to bed, remember that old adage, every hour before midnight is worth two after? Well, it turns out that for people that are meant to be early risers, going to bed at 8:00, you'll wake up at 3:00 or 4:00 feeling great. You go to bed at 11:00, you feel groggy, and there are good reasons to explain that. But Matt would say that need your sleep, period. I'm more of the camp, based on my read of the data, And, yes, we are allowed to disagree and still be friends. It's allowed. In fact, Matt's going to do a series on sleep with our podcast, even though he has a terrific podcast of his own, where we will maybe debate a little bit of this, that there are ways that you can at least replace the feeling of wakefulness that you would have lost if you don't sleep enough. And for me, really, that's why NSDR became such an attractive tool to do for 10 or 30 minutes each morning if I didn't sleep enough the night before. I first learned about yoga nidra, actually at addiction recovery center, trauma recovery center in Florida in 2017. I have a friend, a super talented trauma therapist, who also treats addiction, that I've sent many, many people to, and he has this kind of seemingly like wizard ability to get people who have been addicts to not be addicts. And one of the tools he uses is yoga nidra every morning for 30 minutes, and eventually an hour, which seems like a lot, but then he also has these people wake up very early, maybe an hour before they would normally wake up, and go into that liminal state between sleep and wakefulness. Now, my experience is that 10 to 20 minutes of NSDR, yoga nidra, is sufficient to offset some sleep loss and allow at least me to function, and many people report the same. We have a study going with the Sleep Laboratory at Stanford to explore this in more depth. And what I can tell you, because I'm involved in some of this work, is that there are several military units, because they have no opportunity to get sleep because they're working, that have to rely on tools like this in order to be able to function at their highest level. And I'm sure they will tell you, as I will, that they'd prefer to get 8 to 10 hours of sleep. But, guess what, they can't, and so I think that's the important takeaway is that we don't get to pick how much we sleep, unless you're going to be completely neurotic about your sleep hygiene, which makes you kind of a less interesting person in life, is what I'm told. Going to bed at 8:00 is great like some or most of the time but you got to stay up every once in a while. I mean, after they released "Chimp Empire" on Netflix, I discovered that NSDR is a very valuable tool. And by the way, "Chimp Empire" and "Succession" have a lot of parallels. And if you watch one, I interleave "Chimp Empire", "Succession", "Chimp Empire", "Succession". And you start to realize, like, whoa, like were pretty similar. And then you look at the world differently, I promise. Your podcast has positively changed the lives of so many people, including me, how has it changed your life? OK. I wasn't expecting that one. Thank you, Samantha. Well, first of all, I mean, as this little 11-year-old told me. I mean, this is essentially what I've done my whole life. I'm a fairly private person. Believe it or not, I'm pretty introverted. I spend a lot of time alone, and I think that's required for me. I basically have four modes. Four modes. One, I'm either readying myself through sleep and NSDR to do one of the other three modes, maybe there's a fifth mode, or I'm in one of these other three modes, which is I'm either foraging for information, organizing that information, or dispersing that information, or getting ready to do it all over again. And then, there's this relaxation vacation thing that they keep telling me about. But then I went to Italy, and then like Rick and I like just hung out there, and it didn't feel like work. I also discovered some really great podcasts. I don't know, I think one of the coolest podcasts out there if you like rock and roll, which I love, is A History of 500 Songs by Andrew Hickey's podcast on rock and roll. I like the nerdy podcasts. It's like a graduate or an education in rock and roll. It's so cool. And you'll learn a lot about music and history and the mobs involved and all that stuff. And from what I was told, like Al Capone used to sit there, right? His exit was there, you know, so it was weird. Right? And then he died of syphilis, and like so I don't know how I feel about all that, but they told me that. So I think the podcast has been wonderful as an opportunity to share things that I love. If I had my way, it would be more like this, although more of a dialogue, frankly. It's changed my understanding of what the world is like. I certainly get critique, and that's good. But, again, I was raised by iconoclasts, and particularly my postdoc advisor, Ben Barrus, who unfortunately, as I mentioned, is dead because I worked for him. But he really encouraged all of us in his lab. And often, we were very close friends. I spent the last year of his life recording interview with him. There's actually a documentary coming out about Ben, and then I'm going to release the audio interviews with Ben, which he approved, by the way. And you'll get to realize that the history of what you see is often not what the dead person really did or said. It's going to be fun, so I can't wait till they release this documentary, and then Ben gets to have his voice infused in it. And it'll be a cool documentary. But, as some of you know, that what appears to be and what was and the historical narrative is not necessarily what really happened, but that's just life. So I suppose the short answer is that I feel very honored with the opportunity. Very, very honored. And it's a challenge at times. I suppose the major challenges are when things are taken out of context, like little clips, and things of that sort. Being misunderstood doesn't feel good. But look, at the end of the day, I feel like the luckiest person in the world because I get to spend my time learning. So it's either I'm foraging, I'm organizing or I'm dispersing information that I also want and that I find incredibly useful. Or if not that, then certainly informative and, at times, enchanting as well. So I try and focus on the positive, and I have a number of practices that help me do that. And I am somebody who engages on social media. I'm not a post and ghost kind of person. I want to understand. I think that cuttlefish are super interesting, but human beings are super interesting too. And I have a strong drive for mastery, but also I do have a strong sense of justice, and that can be problematic at times. I define justice as feeling like there's something for us to do about something. Like seeing something that upsets us or that excites us is great, but then if you have a strong sense of justice, you feel like there's something you need to do about it, and not everybody feels that. And then, of course, a desire to understand. And I think, for reasons very personal to me, that relate mostly to just having a kind of incredible array of experiences in life, many of which were like shocking, disturbing, exciting, enchanting that I want to understand. And so it's changed things, but it's like, I don't know, I got one truck, one watch. Which is not to say that I don't care about having things. There are a few things I really love, but mostly, like I'm just thinking about the podcast we got to record on Monday which is about willpower and tenacity. And if I don't stop myself, I'll give it right now. So what do you feel is the next big thing to come to the forefront in the health space? Thanks for this question. One is non-protein amino acids. I love these debates online because I know that there's something there. It's so cool because I grew up in seeing these debates, and you know there's something interesting there because people are debating about it. But the debate isn't what's interesting. It's almost always the thing that people aren't talking about that's sure to surface at some point. And right now, there's. This obsession with like seed oils it's like seed oil. Seed oils. And I can't demonize seed oils. All the data say that if you separate out their caloric load, there's nothing inherently bad about seed oils, and et cetera. I don't know. It's still an emerging literature. But there was a scientist at Stanford, Ed Rubenstein, who passed away at a ripe old age, a brilliant scientist, who talked about, and I had a lot of discussions with when I was a postdoc, about non-protein amino acids. It turns out his son is a neuroscientist at UCSF. His other son is a physician at UCSF. So it's another one of these low performing families. And all wonderful people. And you know, Ed had data that unlike a lot of animals, like birds, there are certain amino acids, which are non-protein amino acids, that exist in fairly high density in seeds and nuts, which is not to say that seeds and nuts are bad. I had almonds this evening, so please. But non-protein amino acids are similar enough to mammalian protein amino acids that if they are consumed in abundance, and perhaps especially in liquid form, that they may, again, may, because this is about the future. This isn't about what we know. This is about where I think there's interest and growing interest. They may be able to incorporate into certain proteins of our tissues of our body that potentially Ed thought could lead to misfolding of those proteins and may explain certain forms of neurodegeneration and other neurocognitive challenges. So I think non-protein amino acids are going to be an important discussion. Now, there are lots of non protein amino acids that don't come from foods, but I think the discussion around non protein amino acids from foods is going to be very interesting. So that's one area. The other area, and perhaps you picked up on this a little bit tonight, is that I like the nuts and boltsy stuff around stress, neuroplasticity. But the high level stuff, I think the relationship between structured thought, abstract thought, I'm not interested in the free will discussion. I just feel like that's a career ender. I'm friends with Robert Sapolsky, and he's got a great book coming out about this called "Determined", so he obviously doesn't believe in free will. But he's far smarter than I ever could be. And it just feels like, I don't know that there's an endpoint with that one. But if anyone could find, it would be Robert. He's oh so smart. But I think that the higher level stuff, creativity, abstract reasoning and thought, defining and better understanding the different states that we can go into in waking. And I confess, without a hint of sheepishness about it, that I also think the notion of spirituality and the belief in things that are beyond our current and conscious understanding is super interesting. I think that as a species we've been challenged and conflicted from go, at least that's what the historical scripture tells us, and that it's sort of inherent to our experience that life is challenging and perplexing and also wonderful. And so I think a better understanding of how to navigate all that, I mean, this stuff in our skulls, except for the eyes, which, by the way, are your two pieces of brain that are not in your skull, the retinas. I have to point that out. You know, it's tricky, and we're trying to use that very tissue to understand it. And so I'm intrigued by the possibility that there are certain aspects of self that maybe are not intended to be explored because they are not really of us, right? Brains interacting with one another is an interesting area, certainly for scientific exploration, but I'm fascinated by and excited about the possibility that, at some point, our species will both understand and the mechanics of our emotions, mechanics of our thought process, creativity, and so on, but that we will also allow room for the stuff that we can't explain with science and to allow room for that in our life experience because I also believe that can be powerful. And while understanding things in great detail and putting mechanism and utility around that and applying that is wonderful, it's the stuff of my life, which is obvious, I also think that there's great value in not trying to control and understand everything and enjoying the mystery of things that are clearly greater than us. [APPLAUSE] How do you balance having fun with having such a rich knowledge and passion in neuroscience and optimization? Fun. People ask me, like what do you do for fun? I think people think I do all the protocols. It's like, sure, I get my sunlight, I drink my water. I do. I do them. But fun, I like learning. I like learning. I do enjoy physical movement. I like learning. For me, OK, so like for me, it's the little things. I don't know, maybe I'm weird. Certainly, I've been told that. The other day, there was a frog in my swimming pool, and he was just like sitting there like. And I just like spent some time looking at him back and forth, and then I had all sorts of ideas about what's he doing? And what's he thinking? And then I was thinking how Oliver Sacks used to spend time imagining experiencing life as a bat through only echolocation. He talked about this. And I thought, and why would he do that? Right? And that's kind of cute. He's like delightful old man, right? He had a 600 pounds free weight squat, won the state California squatting championship but also liked pretending he was a bat. He's a weird dude. Did methamphetamines, raced motorcycles, hung out with movie stars, but then also was like a recluse and liked rocks. OK, that's a weird scientist. Been around a lot of those. But in discussions with people that knew him, I mean, that exercise of like seeing something he thought was cool like a bat allowed him to also use theory of mind to kind of think, what would it be like to have locked in syndrome and only be able to blink your eyes to communicate? And gave him an incredible compassion and sensitivity for other people that then he transmuted into the form of these wonderful books. So for me, fun is really about doing the things that I do systematically each day, but then when something excites me. I know that feeling. I know it physically in my body. And to just follow that trail like a weirdo, right? Like a weirdo, just like Barrus was weird and Barbara Chapman was weird. And like, I think everybody's a little weird if you allow yourself to just see the things that you think are really cool. And there are a bunch of things that I think are really cool that enchant me that a bunch of other people love too. And I know that because I see we're all watching that video or something like that. But I think for me, fun is in the practice of trying to stay open to like the little things. The little things that kids say are always delightful because they're not filtering through all the bullshit that we filter our life experience through. But also just, yeah, I like reading and learning, exercising. I mean, I like to think I'm not a very wooden person. But, at the same time, I mean, I didn't see the "Barbie" movie. No disrespect to Barbie. I go to movies. I do that kind of thing. I don't know what else is there to do? At some point, you know, what else is there to do? Anyway, I mean, I delight in certain things, as you now know far too much about. But fun is a relative term. That was a hard question. [AUDIENCE LAUGHING & APPLAUDING] Thank you. Thanks for the pass. Thanks for that. Do you believe time changes due to daylight savings time is worth a potential loss of productivity? Daylight saving time is anti-health. OK, this is where I'll get like, it's just dumb. It's just dumb. It's just so dumb. It makes no sense. I mean, the director of the Chronobiology Unit at the National Institutes of Mental Health, my good friend, long time friend and brilliant scientist, Samer Hattar, will tell you, it's a stupid idea. It's anti-biology. And increased car crashes, increase heart attacks, increased depression. Kids don't like to wake up early anyway. Parents don't like to wake up early, especially with kids that don't like wake up early. It makes no sense. And then there are all these arguments about is really about trying to truncate the late, you want more light in the evening so there's less crime. Like, that's totally unsubstantiated. Like, completely unsubstantiated. So the daylight savings thing is just stupid. Basically, try and get as much light in your eyes, ideally from sunlight early in the day. And, by the way, if you're worried about cataract, that's a serious concern. After all, I have an appointment in ophthalmology. Cataract, macular degeneration. But guess what, the chair of ophthalmology from Stanford when he came on the podcast verified this. When the sun is low in the sky, you're not really at risk of that. So when the sun is overhead and you're like beaming in your eyes, like trying to get, yeah, it's a problem, but we're talking about viewing low solar angle sunlight in the morning and in the evening. And if there's clouds, do it anyway. In fact, do it longer. And if you can't do that, look at some artificial light inside. Daylight savings, it's just stupid. You know, what happens here is as the night goes on, the amount of GABA in my brain starts to diminish, and I just kind of go to short form. We've thought about podcasting in the middle of the night. That's why when I went on Lex's podcast recently, the more recent one, he did it at 8:00 o'clock at night, and he cried. He made me cry. He didn't cry. He made me cry. I was so tired, and I can't think, and then he asked me about my dog, and I'm talking about the dog. So his goal was to get me to cry. We have this friendship, you know. No, he's delightful. What should I as a 19-year-old college student be doing to maximize the years of neuroplasticity I have left? I get this question, I'm like, oh, man. It's such a great question. Rhys, I'm assuming, yeah. I don't know who you are, Rhys, or what you're doing, but you're 19. So the cool thing is, your brain is hypoplastic. Life is a psychedelic experience without psychedelics. Gosh, people always say, like, if you could go back to your 19-year-old self, what would you do? And that's a tricky one. There are movies about that, right? You know, I would definitely worry less. Yeah. I would worry less. I would have more fun. I would certainly, listen, I started latching on to practices and the understanding of science as a way, for me it was kind of like my world felt very unstable. And for me, it brought stability. But you want to avoid rigidity. So do you want to be the one 19-year-old who's like, oh, got to get to sleep. You know, I got to go back to bed at 8:30 at night. Enjoy life. But I would say, when you're 19, learn how you learn. Learn how to focus. Learn how to rest. Basically, you can stress and focus as much as you want as long as you can still fall asleep at night and sleep well and fall back asleep if you wake up. We hear stress is bad, stress is good, stress is bad, stress is good. Stress is bad unless you're getting enough sleep, in which case, stress is called learning in life. Now, obviously, don't do anything dangerous. Avoid psychological and physical danger. But I think as a 19-year-old, I mean my direct advice would have some cardiovascular activity you like, have some resistance training activity you like, develop some sort of self awareness practice like journaling. It could be meditation. Surround yourself with people that you like. Avoid people you don't like. I mean, it sounds so straightforward but then we can all look into our personal histories and be like, wow, I spent all this time trying to resolve this thing that, clearly, you didn't like them. It's simple. You didn't like them. They weren't into cuttlefish or ferrets. You didn't like them. Wasn't your kind of person, right? And that's not a box you can check on the dating apps, they tell me, right? The ferret thing, I think it'd be very, very, very small subset of people. I think the know thyself thing is huge. Learn to tap into that early feeling of like this feels right. This doesn't feel right. Learn to be a bit of a rudder for yourself. And journal. I still have stacks of things that I wrote across the years, most of it is terrible, but you will find if you go back that you kind of knew better all along even if you didn't do better all along. That voice in your head, don't do that. Do that. This person's like everyone else is crazy about this person but not me. I don't want to sound sentimental, but you have to find your heart, right, or at least not lose it. You have to make sure that you're in touch with that piece of yourself that wasn't judging and just felt good. And as long as it's not something that's self-destructive, I think that's the most important thing. And then, yeah, have tools and practices in place, because they work, and when you're 19, and your neural neuroplasticity is through the roof, you can do a lot less and get a lot more. But don't worry about hitting 25 and it all being over. Certainly, that's not the case. But you can cram in a lot early on. I still regret not learning an instrument. The data on people that learn an instrument even later in life, but certainly at 19, is that it greatly increases your ability to learn all sorts of things. So learn an instrument. How can we transform the American education system to be more effective? Oh, so in ten seconds. [AUDIENCE LAUGHING] So when I'm in charge. Nah, I'm just kidding. A little while back, I did an interview with a major media outlet, and they were very gracious. And then they said, like, what's next? And I was like, I'm going to run for office. I was just like, look, it's not out of the question. But frankly, I think that I'm so poorly suited for that, it's obvious. I'm so poorly suited for that. So it wasn't a joke, but I think as I spent some time afterwards like, I should really go talk to people who do that for a living. But I am very interested in potentially informing policy. If I were to ever be asked, I'd certainly respond. And my stance on this is much in the same vein as the podcast, because keep in mind, the podcast, yes, like suggested I start one, but it was really during those days of the deep 2020 and 2021 pandemic where, by the way, I wasn't allowed to talk about vaccines so I didn't. And also, I don't have any expertise in it, so I was not well suited to do it. But I also decided it's a topic that enough people are talking about. So my response in life, and in general, when people say, what about something is I like, well, I've got a lot of opinions about that, but this isn't the venue. OK. But during the pandemic, I realized there was a lot of circadian disruption, anxiety, stress, a bunch of things happening with visual systems and biological systems that I felt there were tools that people could, perhaps, benefit from. So I started putting that information into the world, and I was really surprised, really surprised that people that I knew from the neuroscience community, for instance at NIMH or in government positions, weren't talking about this stuff, so I just kept doing it. And I think that it made clear to me that the education system is not one thing. It's tough, especially when talking about kids like what to do is a tricky thing. But that the education system, in my mind, should at least involve some sort of discussion early on about this thing called the brain, this thing called the body, how they work, how you can do certain things to modulate your stress level, your sleep not just the importance of sleep and nutrition and avoiding social isolation and all these important things, but giving people some levers and knobs to maneuver within themselves and zero cost tools as a way to do that that transcend socioeconomic boundaries, ideally transcend language as well, because we're not just talking about the United States. And of course, within the United States, there are many different cultures speaking different languages. And maybe AI will soon allow us to put out the podcast into a bunch of different languages. I think it will. So I think the education system should start, in my opinion, with teaching kids how to understand themselves, what to do in difficult scenarios that's really anchored in the real pillars of biology and psychology, and take some of the mystery out of trying to navigate the tough business of growing up. I mean, if you think it's tough being an adult, which it can be, certainly. It's really tough growing up, as we all know. And I think that more tools, more tools, more protocols more tools, more tools, more protocols, more tools. But that's obviously a biased opinion. And no one's ever asked me like, hey, what should we be teaching kids? But if they ask, as you can tell, like, I'm not going to shut up. So I think that was our last question. Thank you all for coming tonight. forgive me for going long. I do want to say thank you, sincere thank you for making your way out here, especially on a weekday night. Thanks for your hospitality. My incredible team, I want to thank them. And certainly, last but not least, thank you for your interest in science. Thank you. Thank you so much. [APPLAUSE] [MUSIC PLAYING]

========================================

--- Video 163 ---
Video ID: ccrbE0QHy94
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ccrbE0QHy94
Title: Dr. Karen Parker: The Causes & Treatments for Autism
Published: 2023-12-11 13:00:24 UTC
Description:
In this episode, my guest is Dr. Karen Parker, Ph.D., professor of psychiatry and director of the Social Neurosciences Research Program at Stanford University School of Medicine. We discuss the biology of social connections and bonding in babies, children and adults. Dr. Parker explains our current understanding of autism and autism spectrum disorders: what they are, why the incidence of autism has increased so dramatically in recent years and both the current and emerging treatments for autism. We also discuss the condition formerly called “Asperger’s.” This episode ought to be highly relevant for anyone interested in child and human development, how social bonds form, and to those curious about autism and other spectrum conditions.

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman 
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman
AeroPress: https://aeropress.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman
Momentous: https://livemomentous.com/huberman 

Dr. Karen Parker
Stanford academic profile: https://stan.md/3RjIkyY 
Parker Lab website: https://stan.md/3NicqBV
Publications: https://stan.md/3RkO5N1
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/karen-parker-52485 

Journal Articles
Prenatal exposure to ultrasound waves impacts neuronal migration in mice: https://go.hubermanlab.com/ptyyU8HyYT
Lancet retracts 12-year-old article linking autism to MMR vaccines: https://go.hubermanlab.com/dsvVI1uTYT
Mother love: what turns it on?: https://go.hubermanlab.com/pdgfu9CEYT
Intranasal oxytocin treatment for social deficits and biomarkers of response in children with autism: https://go.hubermanlab.com/a8XJjHAVYT
Intranasal Oxytocin in Children and Adolescents with Autism Spectrum Disorder: https://go.hubermanlab.com/roEfpTB5YT
The effect of oxytocin nasal spray on social interaction in young children with autism: a randomized clinical trial: https://go.hubermanlab.com/JF1DoSnWYT
Autism-associated biomarkers: test–retest reliability and relationship to quantitative social trait variation in rhesus monkeys: https://go.hubermanlab.com/lw3BnJ47YT
Early Predictors of Impaired Social Functioning in Male Rhesus Macaques (Macaca mulatta): https://go.hubermanlab.com/mGm2a7KEYT
Cerebrospinal fluid vasopressin and symptom severity in children with autism: https://go.hubermanlab.com/vKY2h2EVYT
A randomized placebo-controlled pilot trial shows that intranasal vasopressin improves social deficits in children with autism: https://go.hubermanlab.com/CpRAxmCsYT
Probiotic Therapy with Lactobacillus reuteri Rescues Social and Emotional Recognition Behavior in an Environmental Mouse Model of Autism: https://go.hubermanlab.com/5gXuKmcXYT
Oxytocin and the microbiome: https://go.hubermanlab.com/dsP3pfl8YT
Balovaptan vs Placebo for Social Communication in Childhood Autism Spectrum Disorder: https://go.hubermanlab.com/8bT6VLhWYT

Articles & Other Resources
MAPS “Can Ecstasy [MDMA] Treat Autism?”: https://maps.org/news/media/can-ecstasy-treat-autism
Dr. Robert Malenka: How Your Brain's Reward Circuits Drive Your Choices (Huberman Lab episode): https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/dr-robert-malenka-how-your-brains-reward-circuits-drive-your-choices 
Autism Speaks: https://www.autismspeaks.org 
Chimp Empire (Netflix): https://www.netflix.com/title/81311783 

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Karen Parker
00:01:30 Sponsors: Eight Sleep, LMNT & Aero Press
00:06:25 Autism, Frequency, Diagnosis
00:10:41 Early Interventions; Heritability & Autistic Traits
00:13:00 Autistic Spectrums; Studying Autism
00:21:29 Environment, Risk Factors & In Utero Development
00:29:55 Sponsor: AG1
00:31:26 Oxytocin, Vasopressin, Social Behavior & Parent-Child Bonding
00:43:24 Oxytocin in Humans; Social Features of Autism, Intranasal Oxytocin
00:54:14 Sponsor: InsideTracker
00:55:16 Oxytocin & Autism; Benefit & Risks
01:06:30 Neuroplasticity & Autism; Early Intervention; Challenges of Early Diagnosis
01:14:30 MDMA & Autism
01:17:05 Vasopressin, Social Interaction; Voles & Parenthood
01:27:07 Human Social Connection, Oxytocin Levels & Autism
01:33:45 Primate Model of Social Impairment
01:42:47 Preclinical Animal Models, Mouse & Primates
01:47:11 Primates, Biomarkers & Social Connection; Vasopressin
01:52:20 Vasopressin Levels & Autism, Children & In Utero
02:03:06 Cerebral Spinal Fluid (CSF) & Vasopressin; Urination; Alternative Therapies
02:10:32 Intranasal Vasopressin, Children, Autism & Social Responsiveness
02:19:15 Vasopressin & Social Connection, Mechanism & Future Studies
02:26:35 Gut Microbiome & Vasopressin; Scientific Funding
02:34:52 Vasopressin Pathways, Social Behavior, Autism
02:43:00 Vaccine Theory & Autism; Immunology
02:54:06 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, YouTube Feedback, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

#HubermanLab #Science #Autism

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine my guest today is Dr Karen Parker Dr Karen Parker directs the social neurosciences research program at the Stanford University School of Medicine the goal of her laboratory's research is to understand the biological basis of social functioning at every St age of the lifespan so this includes the bonds that form between infant and parent or parents as well as the bonds that occur between children as they grow up which of course form the template for social functioning when we become adults Dr Parker's research is heavily focused on autism and indeed on all forms of autism spectrum disorders today we discuss autism we talk about the prominent theories and current understanding of the biological basis for autism as well as what Still Remains mysterious and unresolved D about the causes of autism you may have heard that the incidence or perhaps just the diagnosis of autism has dramatically increased in the last 10 to 15 years and today we discuss why it is in fact that the incidence not just the diagnosis but the incidence of autism has so dramatically increased and perhaps most excitingly Dr Parker shares with us brand new research findings from her laboratory that point to a new understanding of what causes autism as well as a novel treatment for autism before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is eight sleep eight sleep makes Smart mattress covers with cooling Heating and sleep tracking capacity I've spoken many times before in this podcast about the fact that sleep is the foundation of mental health physical health and performance now a key component of getting a great night's sleep is that in order to fall and stay deeply asleep your body temperature actually has to drop by about one to 3° and in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized your body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3° one of the best ways to make sure that those temperature changes occur at the appropriate times at the beginning and throughout and at the end of your night when you wake up is to control the temperature of your sleeping environment and that's what eight sleep allows you to do it allows you to program the temperature of your mattress and sleeping environment such that you fall and stay deeply asleep easily and wake up each morning feeling incredibly refreshed and energized I've been sleeping on an eights Sleep mattress cover for almost 3 years now and it has dramatically improved the quality of my sleep so much so that when I travel and I'm at a hotel or an Airbnb and I don't have access to my eight sleep I very much look forward to getting home because my sleep is always better when I sleep on my eight Sleep mattress cover if you'd like to try eights sleep you can go to 8sleep.com huberman to get $50 off their pod 3 mattress cover eight sleep currently ships in the USA Canada UK select countries in the EU and Australia again that's 8sleep.com huberman today's episode is also brought To Us by element element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't that means zero sugar and the appropriate ratios of the electrolyte sodium magnesium and potassium and that correct ratio of electrolytes is extremely important because every cell in your body but especially your nerve cells your ner neurons relies on electrolytes in order to function properly so when you're well hydrated and you have the appropriate amount of electrolytes in your system your mental functioning and your physical functioning is improved I drink one packet of element dissolved in about 16 to 32 ounces of water when I wake up in the morning as well as while I exercise and if I've sweat a lot during that exercise I often will drink a third element packet dissolved in about 32 ounces of water after I exercise element comes in a variety of different flavors all of which I find really tasty I like the Citrus I like the watermelon I like the raspberry frankly I can't pick just one it also comes in chocolate and chocolate mint which I find tastes best if they are put into water dissolved and then heated up I tend to do that in the winter months because of course you don't just need hydration on hot days and in the summer and spring months but also in the winter when the temperatures are cold and the environment tends to be dry if you'd like to try element you can go to drink element spelled lm.com huberman to try a free sample pack again that drink element.com huberman today's episode is also brought To Us by Aeropress Aeropress is similar to a French press for making coffee but is in fact a much better way to make coffee I first learned about Aeropress well over 10 years ago and I've been using one ever since Aeropress was developed by Allan Adler who was an engineer at Stanford and I knew of Allan because he had also built the so-called aobi frisbee which I believe at one time perhaps still now held the Guinness Book of World Records for furthest thrown object and I used to see Allan believe it or not at parks around paloalto testing out different aobi frisbe so he was sort of famous in our community for developing these different Feats of engineering that turned into commercial products now I love coffee I'm somebody that drinks coffee nearly every day usually about 90 to 120 minutes after I wake up in the morning although not always sometimes if I'm going into exercise I'll drink coffee first thing in the morning but I love love love coffee and what I've personally found is that by using the Arrow Press I can make the best possible tasting cup of coffee I don't know what exactly it is in the Aero press that allows the same beans to be prepared into a cup of coffee that tastes that much better as compared to any other form of Brewing that coffee even the traditional French press the Aero press is extremely easy to use and it's extremely compact in fact I take it with me whenever I travel and I use it on the road in hotels even on planes I'll just ask for some hot water and I'll Brew my coffee coffee or tea right there on the plane if you'd like to try Aeropress you can go to Aero press.com huberman that's a r o p.com huberman to get 20% off any Aeropress coffee maker Aeropress ships anywhere in the USA Canada and over 60 other countries around the world again that's Aeropress docomond to get 20% off and now for my discussion with Dr Karen Parker Dr Karen Parker welcome thank you it's great to be here this is going to be perhaps one of the longer conversations that we've been able to have over the years um in part because whenever I see you on campus we're headed in our respective directions but I'm very excited because the topic of autism is one that is on a lot of people's minds and I think the first question that always comes up it seems is whether or not the frequency of autism is indeed increasing or whether or not the field of medicine is is getting better at detecting what was always there over time do we have any clear answers to that well I think it's a multifactorial answer so we're getting better at detecting autism right so in the past we were diagnosing kids at nine or 10 years of age right and now clinicians are able to reliably diagnose kids um at two to three years of age right so there's more people um there are pediatricians have autism screeners now so when you bring in your baby and over the first couple years of life you're filling out screeners that are looking for autism symptoms right so so there's just a lot more awareness around autism but the rates have increased to now 136 us children have a diagnosis of autism which is over two years ago it was 1 in 44 so 1 in 36 wow I feel like it was just yesterday when it was 1 in 80 but is 1 in 36 um the average across Bo and girls um does it skew differently if you look at just male births versus female births yeah that's a great question so autism is male biased and prevalence so you have and again the studies veryy I mean it's it's worth noting that autism is a highly clinically heterogeneous disorder which means that if you met one kid with autism you've met one kid with autism right so so we have to bear that in mind as we have this conversation but you know different studies show that about for every one girl there's three to four boys that are impacted by autism so there's you know differences in the prevalence rate and also there's different monitoring sites so the way in the US that these data are generated is the CDC has 11 monitoring sites across the country and so they they follow um children and then that's where we um that's where the prevalence rates come from and they release new prevalence rates every you know few years so if Physicians are able ble to detect autism early say in a 2-year-old or a three-year-old have to imagine that they're working off of tests that don't rely heavily on language because even though you can get you know some verbose two and three year olds most two and three-year-olds don't have a very extensive vocabulary um and I'm guessing that they're also relying on things like visual gaze um among other things um we've already made clear that this is um not a discussion to allow people to diagnose themselves or others but um with that said what are some of the diagnostic tools that people use you know um is it language is it Vision or does it present as um you know abnormal auditory processing maybe you could give us a sampling so autism is um a behavioral diagnosis right so unlike other areas of medicine where you might be able to take a blood test or there's other sort of tools it's all a behavioral diagnosis by um an expert so usually um a psychiatrist or a psychologist and they look for two core features so the so this is based on the DSM um five and there the two core features are pervasive social interaction challenges and the presence of restricted repetitive Behavior but there are a lot of people with Autism who have anxiety there are a lot of people with sensory challenges there are a lot of people with seizure disorder um Sleep Disorders so again it's each person with autism has this sort of unique collection of traits and you know that's how they get diagnosed we're going to talk a lot today about interventions but how early are some of the behavioral interventions and I should just say any interventions introduced nowadays so if someone brings their child to the pediatrician and they take one of these tests and that a child is deemed as having autism um um will the will the one-year-old or the you know two-year-old immediately go into behavioral interventions well so usually you need to have the diagnosis of autism and then there are behavioral interventions a variety of different ones um that are used there are some studies where um because autism is highly heritable you can have one child with autism and then you if you have subsequent children you're at an increased risk of having subsequent children with autism and these are called Baby sibling studies so what you're doing is enriching the population of infants that you follow prospectively um who are more likely to receive an Autism diagnosis and there are studies where some of those children are enrolled in Behavioral Studies even when they're quote unquote at risk I've heard before that you know parents in which one or typically both parents are say of the engineering mathy physics quote unquote hard science science type are um more likely to have autistic children is that true I mean did that bear out in the data you know if you look at profession or or um you know undergraduate major uh does any of that correlate with the probability of having an autistic child yeah well what I can say is that there's been some studies so what we know is that autistic traits are continuously distributed across the general population and there was a study and there's a couple different instruments that are used used to be able to measure these autistic traits so there's something called the social responsiveness scale and then that's a us-based instrument and there's an Autism quotient that's a similar measure that was um designed in England and what what we know from work with the AQ is that individuals that are in intense stem Fields like engineering physics and math have a greater burden of autistic traits even if they don't have an Autism diagnosis okay so that leads me to wonder whether or not this whole business of a spectrum yeah is actually multiple spectry spectrums is it spectrums or spectry what someone will put it in the in the comments on YouTube we know that for sure please let me know I would like to know what is the plural of spectrum spectrums um you know because when we hear the word spectrum we think okay there's a spectrum of severity right and in fact I have some experience with um severe autism not in my family but where I went to undergraduate University uh UC Santa Barbara down the way from that school was the Deo school which was a school which um has been there for a long time that um parents would send their kids if they were quote unquote severely autistic it was actually where um Dustin Hoffman went to um study for his role in Rainman and the uh the kids who were really delightful they used to come into town every once in a while to the coffee shop where I'd study and they would also continue on from there to Kmart which is why the Dustin Hoffman character would say gotta go to Kmart gotta go to he would do that repetition right that Kmart was down the road from our you know our College housing and the Deo School those kids were literally in a um away from home facility full-time and I spoke to some of the parents at one point and they were at that facility meaning the parents had sent them their children away to live there full-time of course they'd get visits and they'd get visits home um because they were I suppose we could say at the far end of some spectrum that made it at least to the parents idea impossible for them to be at home okay now at the other end of the spectrum if one is just simply thinking in terms of severity I know people who have self-identified as a autistic that's how they've referred to it so I feel comfortable um saying that they've said I am autistic um and they seem pretty high functioning meaning they have driver's licenses drive cars are in healthy relationships and manage life apparently well um they have some traits that yes I would agree are a little bit different right so this is where we get into neurode Divergence right um but I guess the point is you know should we think about autism as on a spectrum or given the fact that there are these um kind of collections of different traits could there be a spectrum of severity also a spectrum of um you know more stereotype behaviors um another spectrum that intersects with that that has to do with you know obsession with a particular topic you know you could imagine that there are you know 50 or 60 different Spectra or spectrums I still don't know which one to say and that when we talk about the Spectrum we're really talking about something that's in multiple dimensions and not just one line that goes from severe to mild does that make sense yeah I mean I think this is where understanding the biological basis of behavior would then allow us to be able to say you like here's these different dimensions right but not understanding the biology you're left with okay we're are we lumpers or Splitters like how do we think about this because autism is highly heritable so there's about 40 to 80% of autism is um is genetic right so these vary wildly right but the but the common thinking is that the majority about 50% of autism is um is associated with common genetic variants and so the way that we've always thought about this is that there is this you know autism is largely an inherited polygenic condition and but what I mean by that is that you have a lot of common variants that are additive and so if you think about this collection of common genetic variant that underly the Spectrum right so if you have less of a dosing of some of these common variants you might see somebody who's a lot more who's higher functioning like you said and if you end up with one of these single Gene High penetrant um disorders you might see severe intellectual disability and sort of lower functioning on the other end of the spectrum but I think that there is a lot that we don't know and what you're bringing up I think underlines you know sort of an issue with autism autism which is common for many brain disorders which is like if you don't understand the underlying biological basis it also gets very difficult to diagnose and treat right and that's where we are with a lot of different you know psychiatric and neurodevelopmental disorders to date has there been any specific neural network that we can point to and say Ah that's the neural network that seems to be different in people who are on the autism spectrum um I saw a study published recently that seemed to point to the idea that the genes that are altered in autism um at least include a large number of genes that are altered or the proteins that are the consequence of those genes are altered and exist at the synapse at the connections between neurons and I'm asking it that way because you know some years ago I was at a talk on autism at Stanford and someone raised their hand and says um do we even know that autism is a brain issue right could couldn't it be an issue of you know the immune system or the cardiovascular system which at the time seemed like okay gosh of course it's but wait then you stop and you think that's a really good question right how do we know it's a it's a challenge of the brain right I think that's a great question right and there may be people talk about just take for a moment that this is a brain disorder how do you study it in people right so you know it's very difficult to get access to either cerebral spinal fluid which is a fluid that bathes the brain um brain tissue biopsies it's very hard to get people especially children that are really impacted into a brain scanner right because they can't sit still they may have sensory issues they don't want to go into a scanner right so a lot of the tools that neuroscientists or or psychiatrist have to think about looking at the brain are um limited right and then and then the other part is how do you model so the other way we might think about getting access or or thinking about model systems what we need to do is think about the control animals and we need to make sure that the species that we're modeling them in has um features of control humans if you will so we need to have complex cognitive abilities we need to have complex social skills we need to have an organism that has Vision as its primary sensory modality right potentially sleep consolidating so we need to think about all of those and and the the tricky part I think until fairly recently was that we were doing all of this work in Mouse models and you know the control mice just fundamentally lack many of the characteristics that are needed to model you know autism with Fidelity right and I think that's you know when we look at drug development pipelines about 50% of preclinical failures so that would be something that's tested in an animal that works and then fails in a human clinical drug trial 50% of those failures can be attributed to poorly selected animal models and so I think part of where we we will be getting traction is picking you know developing sophisticated models as a sort of point of entry into being able to understand some of these things that are really difficult us studying people yeah such a key point and um for those that um have not heard of pre-clinical models pre-clinical models are non-human models so it could be Mouse could be nonhuman primate could be flies or worms for that matter but uh we're going to talk a lot about non-human primate preclinical models um and the work that you've been doing and of course also the work that you've been doing in humans um the other animal um the other private the other primate right exactly I love to remind people that we're primates um Old World primates um thank you for doing that so you've been talking about the genetic influences on autism and of course genes in the environment interact right it's never nature or nurture it's always an interaction and that isn't just about the epig genome it's also just about the fact that nature impacts the genome and our genome impacts the way that we interact with the environment Etc so what is the role of the environment in autism both the frequency and the presentation of autism right so I mean there are again lots of different epidemiological studies so um Advanced parental age uh prematurity severe prematurity is a risk factor for autism um maternal illness during pregnancy um so there's there's a bunch of different things that have been associated with an increased risk for autism in terms of environmental influences and how they can intersect with Biology um one of the things that I was really struck by in the early 2000s that at least by my read of the literature hasn't really gone anywhere was this idea that was proposed by pashco who used to run the neurobiology department um at Yale um expert in brain neuro anatomy in non-human primates and in humans embryology um really luminary of our field and he had a series of papers exploring how the migration of neurons during early development you know it's you and I both know but most people out there probably don't know because we haven't covered this in the podcast um it's not typical dinner table conversation you know when you when an embryo when a human embryo is developing the the neurons are born at one location and they migrate out some distance to their final um resting place where then they grow out their connections and connect with one another and that process of neuron neuronal migration is oh so critical for the eventual wiring of the brain and rakes had this idea that perhaps and I really want to emphasize perhaps that the more frequent incidents of autism might be correlated with the increase in early prenatal ultrasound and he had these papers published in number of really high-profile journals including proceedings of the National Academy and Science and elsewhere showing that in a mouse model if you do Ultrasound with each successive ultrasound you got more migration errors right so there to me was a you know an interesting example of of the environment frequency of ultrasound and cell migration having some sort of interaction but it seemed like it never went anywhere it never got tacked to okay you should keep in mind the number of ultrasounds that you're getting for your child and of course ultrasounds are critical for for pregnant women to get because they can Stave off a number of developmental issues and they're super important but you know we've heard about ultrasound you know it within the scientific literature and then occasionally we'll hear other theories about okay it's having two parents who are both engineers and then we'll hear oh you know it's um you know toxicity in the food environment we've heard you know hypothesis about vaccines or the the adant that the vaccines are contained in you know in that large cloud of the has anything really um emerged from them as like okay there really seems to be at least one major risk factor environmental risk factor because I feel like all those theories I come up get some popular press bunch of papers are published sometimes those papers are retracted like in the case of the vaccines um and then the theory kind of dies yeah so is there any specific environmental influence on autism that we can say yes they're really seems to be something there yeah I I mean it's a it's a really spectacularly good question I think the tricky part about it is that every single person that comes into a trial has a different genetic background right and so until we can have these a priori stratified trials where you could then you know as a good scientist you would only manipulate maybe one two variables at a time right but when you're doing these large epidemiological studies because you can't it's very difficult to do experimental studies right especially with developing children um I think that's an incredibly difficult study to do right so there's been an interest in this field of there's these neurogenetic syndromes that have high penetrance for autism which basically means that you could have a disorder um or you know another genetic condition let's say it doesn't have to be a single Gene but that a lot of those kids tend to also get an Autism diagnosis and so there's been work and like so for instance fragile X is a good example where because autism is so diverse in terms of clinical presentation that let's say you have a medication that could work for a handful of kids in the trial you may not be statistically powered to see it right so so you know the way I think about the autism world is there's so little we don't know so think about being in a dark room and you have a flashlight and you only see where you shine the light right and so if you think about a very heterogeneous genetic heterogeneous study it's going to be very difficult to tease out these pieces because an environmental risk factor um might be a driver for one kid but not another right and so I think what we need to do is to have these genetically defined subgroups of individuals and then be able to test the G by Gene by environment interactions or in this genetically defined group of individuals um can we test this certain medication to see if it's beneficial for this subgroup of children got it so you you mentioned fragile X which um we know um presents with autism like symptoms in some cases and then I think of another disease like um Timothy syndrome a mutation in an L Type calcium channel which um for those of you that don't know what these cell type calcium channels are they're they're not just important for the function of neurons in the brain they're really important for the function of neurons and other other tissues including heart tissue right so um kids with Timothy Syndrome have cardiac issues yeah and they have autism so you know I think it's important for us to kind of explore this a bit because in most people's minds you know kids with autism have autism and occasionally they'll have other issues you know gut issues or heart issues or um muscular skeletal issues but we often think that that's the consequence of the autism but often times that they have multiple things going on and the autism actually could be secondary or independent of the other thing that's going on so this is what leads me back to this idea of a spectrum you know is you know is it possible that what we call autism is actually like 50 different disorders or 50 different conditions depending on what one wants to call them um I mean what is autism really I mean is it it's what does it really center around what and I I think here maybe it's useful to go like do we go to the diagnostic criteria like how do we decide if a child has autism if they also have a bunch of other things that are challenging them I I think that that's The $64,000 Question right and and and again in other areas of medicine so if you think about let's think about cancer biology right like decades ago somebody would come in with cancer and you would hit them with radiation chemotherapy and that was the best that we could do right but with the invention of a lot of molecular tools you can remove a a tumor and you can do molecular profiling and even you know have personalized medications made right to attack that t tumor and so you know know what's really tricky when you have a behavioral diagnosis that's not biologically defined you you see a lot of heterogeneity so it's incredibly difficult I think to answer this question because we don't know how many kinds of autismsocial people people I've heard clinicians say well that's not really autism right that's a piece of fragile X right but if it's a behavioral diagnosis and they meet be behavioral criteria it becomes this weird circular argument right so like until we really understand what autism is I I I think that it's going to be very tricky to start you know subing different aspects of the condition as we all know quality nutrition influences of course our physical health but also our mental health and our cognitive functioning our memory our ability to learn new things and to focus and we know that one of the most important features of highquality nutrition is making sure that we get enough vitamins and minerals from highquality unprocessed or minimally processed sources as well as enough probiotics and prebiotics and fiber to support basically all the cellular functions in our body including the gut microbiome now I like most everybody try to get optimal nutrition from Whole Foods ideally mostly from minimally processed or nonprocessed Foods however one of the challenges that I and so many other people face is getting enough servings of high quality fruits and vegetables per day as well as fiber and probiotics that often accompany those fruits and vegetables that's why way back in 2012 long before I ever had a podcast I started drinking ag1 and so I'm delighted that ag1 is sponsoring the hubman Lab podcast the reason I started taking ag1 and the reason I still drink ag1 once or twice a day is that it provides all of my foundational nutritional needs that is it provides insurance that I get the proper amounts of those vitamins minerals probiotics and fiber to ensure optimal mental health physical health and performance if you'd like to try ag1 you can go to drink a1.com huberman to claim a special offer they're giving away five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 again that's drink a1.com huberman to claim that special offer well probably a good time for us to think about the work that you've done in terms of trying to tack the biology of social communication and behavior yeah right those things interact not just language but also Behavior to autism in humans using non-human primate models and then of course to also discuss some of the work that you've been doing in humans and we can't have that discussion without first having a discussion about two neuropeptides that I think most people have heard of at least one of them and I think there's a lot of misunderstanding about but you're going to clarify that for us which are oxytocin and vasopressin so before we dive into the uh the important work that you've been doing on vasopressin in particular but also oxytocin and autism what are oxytocin and vasopress really okay so they're these small little peptide they're nine amino acids long are very tiny they only differ by two amino acids and they're these ancient peptides that are hundreds of millions of years old and in almost any species studied um whether it's the current version you might have vasit tocin or other Mosin which are um sort of precursor forms in other species but they're highly evolutionarily conserved and they're involved in social behavior um in pretty much any it could be egg laying it could be you know but but reproduction and social behavior across the philogenetic tax so house cats make vasopressin and oxytocin humans obviously make vasopressin and oxytocin and pretty much every other species that has to interact with and connect with other members of its species especially mammals right so oxytocin and vasor pressin are pervasive and Maman species do the different species tend to make oxytocin and vasopressin in similar brain areas and tissues um yes but not completely overlapping but I I think the thing that the the beautiful mystery about these and the infuriating piece of them is that because they're so structurally similar um they can have similar effects and they there's four receptors that they bind to so if you think about a hormone or a neurotransmitter so oxytocin vasor pressent if you think about them like a key and a receptor like a lock and you have to put them together to open a door open Behavior they can bind to these four receptors so it can be very difficult to disentangle which one is acting and at which receptor and where in the brain oh so oxytocin vasopressin are chemically similar yes interesting yes and uh where would you say lies their greatest um output Divergence which is just nerd speak for um is there an example of something that oxytocin does that vasopressin doesn't and vice versa yeah okay so what's really fascinating is these two neurotransmitters or hormones were discovered for their peripheral effects which basically means not in their brain but somewhere in their body and so oxytocin's involved in um uterine contractions and milk let down and so was during lactation so people sort of always thought of it as the female hormone and then vasopress has um at least in the in the peripheral system has been involved in um urine regul like urinary output regulation blood pressure um and so we only knew about their their physiological roles as their sort of classic hormones for decades and what was interesting is these um like naming conventions are fascinating medicine right so you could name a virus after where it was first found right or it could be named after somebody who discovered the disease like Alzheimer's for instance is a good example and what was interesting oxytocin was only named once vasor pressin was named twice so it's either called Arginine vasor pressin or anti-diuretic hormone and so it had two different names and so as you can imagine sometimes genes are named twice and so somebody in cancer is studying one Gene and somebody and autism is studying another and they're not even communicating because they don't even realize that they've at least historically now we have all kinds of Gene annotation sites so it's less likely to happen now but but what was fascinating is they were these hormones were named oxytocin is Greek for quick birth so for decades people only appreciated their physiological roles but but there were neuron anatomist saying hey so these are both made they're made in a lot of different places but the the the action sort of happens in the hypothalamus where they're made and there were anatomists that said wait these sort of project back into the brain what are these doing in the brain and one of my favorite historical stories was um I had a mentor um uh a colleague like an you know who I didn't train with but he was um a real source of wisdom to me for many years and his name is Court Peterson and he told me this wonderful story about this duuk oologist named Peter claer and um Peter was studying ulet so sheep and goats and he wrote a story of paper in 1971 called Mother Love what turns it on and um you know one thing about science is I love going back and seeing where do the Pearls of Wisdom come from and so he wrote this and said you know oxytocin is orchestrating all these events of motherhood and there are sheep and goats in particular that have offspring that are precocious meaning they're basically born ready you know within an hour they can run with the herd unlike our species which is altricial meaning we have very helpless infants and mom needs to bond really quickly with that baby if it's going to be running around and you only you know from an evolutionary perspective you want to be investing in the baby that's yours not somebody else's right and um he hypothesized that it was oxytocin that was being co-released into the brain and during milk let down that was what turned Mother Love on and that was really the beginning of this whole field of thinking and so that opened up thinking about oxytocin in rodent maternal care and a variety of other instances can I just briefly interrupt you because I find this so interesting and I know it's interesting to everyone listening as well because you know yes and thank you for making it clear that oxid doin has many different roles um but this role of Mother Love and bonding to infant um has me needing to ask whether or not the idea was that oxytocin is released in the mother when she interacts with her own baby um and that leads me to the question is oxytocin also released in the baby um in reaction to to the mother and how long is that effect lasting because in order to have a pervasive bond with that baby and not just some other baby and of course we still have visual cues and you know we know our baby versus another baby most instances um there are rare exceptions or perhaps not so rare exceptions but leaving those aside you know the mechanism that would allow for mother infant bonding and infant mother bonding by way of oxytocin presumably is something that is literally changing their brains saying it's you are the are the center of my life right and the baby of course is saying well you are my life because you are the source of life right certainly for the early part um early part of life and that nowadays it seems that that that can extend well into the uh the teens and 20s for some people but um you how how is oxytocin working is it is it working over the course of minutes hours is there some specificity of this baby and this mom that links them in in some more pervasive way I mean how is oxytocin doing this magic of bonding yeah I mean it's it's very species specific right so I think that and you need to think about like The evolutionary history of the species right so if you think about sheep or goats the early studies that were done are you um The Passage through the vaginal Canal was what you know so you would activate oxytocin receptors that way but if you gave an oxytocin antagonist meaning you would give into the brain something that blocked the oxytocin receptors so if the oxytocin is being released into the BL brain but you have a pharmacological agent blocking its ability to bind to its receptors these sheep and goats wouldn't um bond to their baby for instance so literally the passage of the baby out of the vaginal Canal triggers the oxytocin pathway the release of oxytocin as in lactation does too nature is so beautiful because if you had to pick one event yeah to trigger the release of oxytocin if oxytocin's role is to create bonding with offspring that would be the event because that's a tough one to mistake right right but but what I will say because I think you will you know to avoid you getting attacked on Twitter or wherever you might I'm GNA get attacked anyway if not if not for this discussion then another one but I'm tougher than I like so um but it's really species specific right so if you think about our species and a lot of primate species we live in these extended family groups and that's how we evolved and so unlike a goat or a sheep that might live in a herd where there's a lot of non-relatives we lived in a community of relatives right and so we and we do all kinds of care of extended relatives and so you wouldn't necessarily expect in a primate species where you have this long rearing history where help from the family and and biparental care where where sort of everybody sort of like it takes a village to raise the baby we readily adopt in our in primate societies right and so you know um like I had a CE I mean I'll tell you something personal I had a C-section um and uh had I had a lot of postpartum complications and so lactation didn't work out that well for me one of my friends would say um I massive um DVS and Pulmonary emop and so I almost died after my son was born the first time and so I didn't have a vaginal delivery I couldn't DVT thrombosis yeah and it was sort of like welcome to Motherhood and I was in the ICU and um had to get a filter put in um an inferior vnea filter to um stop me from dying because the I had scattershot clots all over my lungs and so I didn't really you know I didn't I I didn't do a vaginal delivery I had a C-section and I wasn't really able to lactate and man I love that baby right so you know I can give you know what I will say is um it's really different in primates and we don't really understand how bonding occurs but what I will say is that bonding between a mother you really need to think about the evolutionary selective pressure so I was an evolutionary biologist before I found Neuroscience right and so I really everything I do I think about from an evolutionary perspective um so but it it is um many people go into the oxytocin V oppressing field because they have a lot of questions about social interactions right like I think if you think about us is being social is actually one of the one of the core characteristics of our species right so social interactions are rewarding from infancy they Keep Us Alive as you mentioned right and so I think it's not an accident that the way we think about disorder in our species is many disorders are disorders because of lack of social connectedness right so it could be something like autism where you know there's these pervasive social interaction impairments it could be something like drug abuse where you know you you a risk factor for drug abuse is feeling you know socially disconnected and alone right um social um isolation or loss of a loved one is a very strong predictor of the onset of a stress related depressive anxiety disorder in terms of when and how oxytocin is released you mentioned um mother infant bonding um I think you said yes that the infant is also releasing oxytocin we think um so it's it's bidirectional um we think I think most of the work has been done in mom would be and and again this has not been really done well in primates right so we're extrapolating this information from species that have different evolutionary histories than us right so it's go sheeps um Prairie vs mice rats so what do we know about the role of oxytocin in humans do I mean we know it's there yeah we presume based on the animal models that it's involved in mother infant bonding um and presumably romantic partner bonding at least you hear that a lot um it was unfortunately nicknamed The Love hormone yes um and the reason it's unfortunate it was is that while that might cue attention to oxytocin and I'm you know a big fan of people paying attention to biological phenomena it uh it discards the other and many roles of of oxytocin but yeah what can we say about oxytocin in humans if anything like do we know that it does I mean we're just so we're assuming based on the animal models that it does something I mean this is very different than like dopamine where there's tons of animal model data but we know but they brain Imaging where we know where dopamine is expressed and do we even know where oxytocin receptors are expressed in the human brain presumably that information is is out there recently but again there's a lot of specificity and I think if you're thinking about disorders you would then have to study those specific subpopulations right and and you need you know a lot of this work has been done so you have to think about how do we study it right so the best way to study it would be to have radio tracers where you could then which we do have for dopamine and and other compounds where you would then go and see where after somebody's performed a task do we see you know um activation right or uptake um there are some Imaging studies they're usually done giving intranasal oxytocin um and then you basically ask questions about okay we give you oxytocin and trenas which presumably enters the brain there's we could talk about reasons why we think that um and then we have you perform on some task right and so you know there's evidence if you give oxytocin it diminishes the amygdala's response um to fearful stimuli right so that it might have this sort of pro-social effect and and it was actually data like that that caused people to start thinking um initially about oxytocin and those are data on humans that's right it reminds me that there was this brief moment where oxytocin wasn't just being discussed as the love hormone it it was being discussed as the trust hormon right also um far too simple heuristic but but again I think it's cool that the you know that the the Press picks up on these things and at least tells people about what's being discovered and we just always have to be careful that not um uh have it leads the assumption that that's the only role of a given of a given hormone so um it can reduce apparently it can reduce the output of the amydala in some way this brain area associated with um threat detection um and so you could imagine how that would bias the person toward being more pro-social right um have there been studies exploring the role of oxytocin in making autistic children more pro-social and behind that question I suppose is the assump you can verify or or not that autistic children are less pro-social than other children um is that true um or is it that you know autistic kids are just maybe more pro-social with the one friend they really really like um I happen to know some kids uh with autism or however you want to phrase it and um they have close friends and they seem to really like those specific friends a lot like they seem very happy when they show up at the door and like all all the Hallmarks of you know healthy social mind but it is true that they are uncomfortable in in groups and where there's a lot of noise a busy birthday party is overwhelming for them but you see them playing with one or two friends and like you could see all that and assume okay it's just kind of an introverted kid actually kind of reminds me of me you know I mean I don't have a problem with crowds but I I much prefer to be with a small group of friends or one close friend so I hear you I'm that way too right so um you know how do we think about this um okay well I would say the social features of autism are interesting right and so you might have there were there was an attempt a long time ago like 1979 there's a woman named Lura Wing who tried to subtype the social features of autism right and so there could be people um that are socially avoidant and really just don't want to have social interactions there could be kids that are um active but odd which means that they have an interest in being social but maybe they don't read social cues right and they interact in ways that other kids don't understand or make could cause bullying right and sounds like Junior High School yeah exactly um and and that's often why um you know some autistic kids do better with adults right because adults know how to sort of Channel um discussions with somebody who might be a little socially awkward right but there's different phenotypes I mean uh people having a disinterest in social interactions could be that they're highly socially anxious right um that making eye contact makes them anxious you again that's another caveat um there have been some studies administering oxytocin to individuals with autism and again these are these single dose studies so the first studies that were were done were looking at single dose oxytocin in males because some of the and we can talk a little bit about why oxytocin versus vasopressin which vasopressin actually would have been my choice um based on the animal literature and we can talk about that but vas oxytocin was given to males um partly because it wouldn't the idea would be that the of Target effects in the peripheral nervous system I.E milk let down uterine contraction are not going to happen in males right and so that it was deemed that they might be safer subjects males are often also the the go-to for research studies as you may have talked about on on your podcast before too something that fortunately is changing thanks to a mandate by the uh by the NIH correct um I I had to just kind of um smile slash um raise my eyebrows a little bit at the idea that you know the the assumption that oxytocin administered to males yes one can see why it wouldn't cause milk down or uterine contract but um but of there could be other peripheral effects ofto and males but they had to pick they had to pick one so they went with males okay so um and there is this higher incidence of autism in males so it's not a terrible place to start you just would hope that they would also do the the experiment on females but um so they're doing this by nasal spray so intranasal one dose correct and for reasons that I don't understand it's 24 international units and I think maybe somebody did the first study using it and you know this is how science happens right and it worked and so then everyone uses that protocol and so then there's been a lot of studies looking at um you know there's one reading the mind and the eyes so can you look at pictures of somebody's eyes and then ask what is the emotion that they're feeling right after receiving this or Placebo um where's your eye gaze going in a picture right so one of one of the theories is that people with Autism May at least a subset of them lack social motivation so maybe they're not looking in the places like eyes where you rece receive a lot of social cues that are relevant to social communication and so some of these early studies showed that a single dose of oxytocin in people that were um had high functioning autism so they were verbal like you said they could come in for studies and that it looked like it had some potential Effectiveness and so there became a really strong interest in the field to think about oxytocin potentially is a therapy for autism and is oxytocin available over the counter does it require prescription I I mean you see sites that are selling it but that doesn't mean anything these days right um there's gry Market there's all sorts of stuff going on um but I know people that have used oxytocin um there's actually a market for and by the way folks I'm not suggesting this but someone the other day told me that they've been regularly taking um uh oxytocin ketamine nasal inhalations um as part of their work with their licensed therapist on um like PTSD type stuff relating to let's just call it relational trauma okay um so that's happening um but let's just think about oxytocin alone for the moment um are parents of of autistic kids able to like buy oxytocin nasal spray no so so it would need to be written like the prescription would be need to be written by a um by a physician um and it's not on the market right so there's one thing we should say is there's only two drugs that are approved by the FDA to treat autism and they're both antis psychotics which they um they treat Associated features like irritability and they have off Target effects like weight gain and and and you know so we don't have any medications that are currently approved in the US or anywhere else for that matter to treat the core features of autism interesting and um unfortunate um and hopefully that will change in the not too distant future um do we know that children autism people with Autism because I'm going to just sort of assume that um autism is stable over the lifespan um like if a child is diagnosed with autism are they going to be an adolescent and adult with autism so I would say that in a lot of cases autism has lifelong impact but there are people who outgrow their diagnosis um you know there are people who respond well to behavioral therapy um I mean obviously it's not the Cure All for everybody there's lots of people who go through intensive behavioral therapy and probably see minimal benefits um but I mean it's certainly something that occurs in childhood for the diagnosis occurs in childhood and it you know for most people will then be present across the lifespan so we could say people with Autism because each study sometimes we'll have adults sometimes you'll have teenagers sometimes you'll have kids I'd like to take a quick break and thank our sponsor insid tracker insid tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals now I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term Health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test a major problem with a lot of blood tests out there however is that you get information back about metabolic factors lipids and hormones and so forth but you don't know what to do with that information with inside tracker they make it very easy because they have a personalized platform that allows you to see the levels of all those things metabolic factors lipids hormones Etc but it gives you specific directives that you can follow that relate to nutrition behavioral modifications supplements Etc that can help you bring those numbers into the ranges that are optimal for you if you'd like to try insid tracker you can go to insid tracker.com huberman to get 20% off any of insid tracker's plans again that's insid tracker.com huberman is it known whether or not people with Autism assuming they meet the criteria for being autistic at that at that moment um have lower natural circulating or active levels of oxytocin because you know it's one thing for a nasal spray to um of oxytocin to improve social functioning it's another um to know that it that the effect is addressing an underlying biological deficit yeah that's it's such a great question okay so we should unpack that because there's been a lot of work in this area so the first question is where are we measuring the oxytocin right so we mentioned oxytocin has all kinds of effect in the body as well as the brain and it's released into the blood but it's also released directly into the brain and there's variable evidence about if you measure it in blood is it a readout of the brain or not right or should you be looking at something like spinal fluid that's maybe a a better biochemical proxy of the brain um most studies so what I will say is there were there's been m a handful of small studies where there has been some you know there's been some benefit Maybe no benefit small effects we did a study that was a small study at Stamford and it was based on um Mouse genetic data and I'll I'll sort of walk you through what we did um so there's multiple Mouse models of these neurogenetic syndromes where um people have social impairment right we can Qui quibble about whether that's autism or not but that they have social impairment and so that there are this um fragile X Mouse there's a PR willly syndrome Mouse which is the magile 2 Gene that um gets manipulated and then there's a catnap two mouse and in all of those instances when you genetically modify those mice you see a reduction of oxytocin in the hypothalamus and what's interesting is that um in those instances where you see this genetic modification you do see lower blood levels in these genetically defined models what's really cool is you can give oxytocin across development in those models and at least in the cat to Mouse you can restore oxytocin neuron number to equivalent of control animals suggesting that oxytocin is doing something in these oxytocin deficient animals right so these are not an oxytocin Gene manipulation but these are these syndromes where you see as a consequence of manipulating genes for these syndromes that oxytocin gets knocked down right and so our thinking when we went into our clinical trial was what if um its blood oxytocin levels that there going to be a subset of individuals that just make less oxytocin humans and that maybe those are the individuals who could who stand to benefit the most from treatment and so we were the first group um to ask you know across this range of individuals who showed up and we did in all the trials that we'll talk about today um these are done with my colleague Antonio Harden at Stanford who's a child psychiatrist um and we always have double blind meaning that the investigative team is blind and that the um or unaware I should say they're unaware of treatment and then the families and the children are unaware um and then they're randomized meaning there's an equal chance you could get either drug or Placebo um and they're and they're controlled right okay so we asked if we know what your pre pre-treatment pre-treatment blood oxytocin level is who's going to benefit from treatment and we found a couple really interesting things one was that the lower your Baseline so your pre-treatment blood oxytocin level you showed much greater benefit from the oxytocin intervention these are children one one intervention one nasal spray this was four weeks sorry I should have clarified this is four weeks of treatment being um administered oxytocin twice a day okay and um and and so we saw Effectiveness there may sorry to interrupt so much but just uh males male and female subjects we did but again you know because the autism is male biased and prevalence even if you make this heroic effort to over recruit try to get more girls in and um in in the study we usually try to aim for the prevalence rate because it's difficult to get girls just because there's fewer of them got it okay but um boys and girls were included they're taking oxytocin over the period of several four weeks and if they started off with lower Baseline levels of oxytocin you observed a benefit of the oxytocin treatment in those individuals what about the individuals who had normal to high you didn't see much benefit right and so that was a a cue to me to think that there may be a subset of individuals that you know for whatever reason they have lower oxytocin and they may stand to benefit more from treatment and none of the prior studies had looked at blood oxytocin levels and so what we had thought was that well maybe if everybody had measured Baseline blood oxytocin levels maybe some of these you know maybe there would have been more um positive outcomes so but there's there's a lot of controversy in this field about whether oxytocin is a treatment for autism right so after we completed that trial there was a large multi-site um what's called a phase three oxytocin treatment trial that was done at I think five sites and they gave oxytocin for an extended period of time um and they showed no benefit um and and were they looking to see who started off with low levels of oxytocin at pre-treatment so what was interesting about that study um and there were a lot of issues with it was that um oxytocin is something where you have to if you look at it it degrades it's like that's kind of what I joke about right so you need to take it we take when we go in we have like these really intense protocols right so you go in and we have vacutainer tubes that are cold and we put them on ice and then the FLOTUS takes the blood from the child a lot of technical gymastics yeah and then we make sure we spin it in a centrifuge cold and then we pipe head it onto dry eyes so like so we have very minimal loss of the signal and so if you don't adhere to those rigid protocols which is very difficult to do across multiple sites um it can be very difficult to get an accurate read of oxytocin and so I think for me it's still an open question um they didn't see that blood oxytocin predicted response um in that study um the data weren't provided in the paper it was just said that they didn't um but it's still an open question and so that you know maybe that is the way if you give it acutely like in those early studies we talked about that maybe oxytocin you know diminishes Spar we know that oxytocin decreases um the stress axis the hypothalamic pituitary um adrenal axis and then it can diminish anxiety in animal models so we that's well established um and in a former life I was a stress researcher so I've spent a lot of time thinking about this but but it's sort of the sad thing is is that once you have a negative trial it um there isn't a lot of interest in funding uh the work going forward right and so I think it's still really an open question about if there is a subset of individuals that could benefit from oxytocin replacement therapy right and it's and and until there's money to do that work um we may not ever know the answer well be it will be important for that work to be done eventually hopefully the field will return to it despite whatever Trends might be happening now I think it's important to know for the parents of autistic children um whether or not there were any negative effects of oxytocin Administration in particular in the children that did not benefit from oxytocin treatment the rationale is the following well of course these things require a prescription um if a parent has a child with autism especially if they're young enough that the behavioral interventions could possibly stand a good chance of inducing neuroplasticity rewiring of the neural circuits that underly social connection well then there's this um Tim limited window um in which you know those parents presumably are willing to try most anything provided it's safe right so let's assume and I'm making up these numbers now because I haven't seen this study but according to what you told me that let's say a third of the autistic boys and girls that come in have um low Baseline levels of oxytocin they're the ones that are going to benefit from this oxytocin intervention the other 23ds don't well given the difficulties of measuring Baseline levels of oxytocin most people don't have access to those kind of resources um if it's safe to give oxytocin no matter what well then if I were that parent I'd be knocking on my Physician's door saying hey give me an oxytocin spray because my kid might fall into that onethird category if and only if it turns out that oxytocin is safe to give but if there's a risk profile that doesn't justify that kind of shotgun approach well then I wouldn't do that yeah so um is oxytocin spray safe and if so why doesn't every physician who has a patient with autism give them oxytocin nasal spray right it's a great question and I I know that you know I'm a parent of three children and I know this sense of like you would do anything to help your child right and so I I think the tricky part is that so one thing I will say is that all of the studies and there's been many of them have shown that oxytocin is um is relatively safe in a pediatric population right um the tricky part is I don't know there's Physicians that you know really pay attention to clinical trials and if they don't see a benefit they may not be willing to write the prescription right so until we could identify a group of children that could benefit you know we need to create the opportunity for Physicians to recognize that this could potentially still be a treatment right but that work you know but I I think the tricky part and what I will say is and we can maybe talk a bit about vasor press which you know my feeling is that if I was placing bets and and having to choose between these two my my money would be on vasor press well we are definitely going to yeah um talk about Vaso pressent in detail I mean the reason I I mentioned that hypothetical scenario is just the sense of urgency and in some cases desperation that parents feel and you know time's ticking and if oxytocin's safe then you know um I guess I'll put in my vote that you know parents should at least talk to their physician maybe even hand them the study um to consider but I can also understand the perspective of a pediatrician who says well listen it was a small number of kids that benefited um you're welcome to try it but I don't you know it doesn't seem like the results are that impressive but um you this gets to a bunch of larger issues about you know Medical Care and randomized control trials and the desperation of parents and kids to treat neurodevelopmental challenges um I I just want to ask because it feels relevant in a in a real way um you know if ultimately the goal of improving symptom profiles in autistic kids is about improving social cognition and social behavior and that process involves rewiring of brain circuits neuroplasticity is there any reason reason to think that other approaches to inducing neuroplasticity would be beneficial even if they're not in the biological Pathways that are disrupted in autism um I think for instance about the now extensive use of ssris for the treatment of depression some cases it works in some cases it doesn't side effect profiles are a serious concern yeah as I've discussed on this podcast before but ultimately we know that depression is not a serotonin deficiency in most cases ssris or atypical anti-depressants like Ryon Wellbutrin and things of that sort when they work they probably work because of their ability to induce neuro or assist neuroplasticity right right um also the trials on psilocybin are not really about psilocybin they're about neuroplasticity at least the trials for depression right there may be other uses of psilocybin that relate more directly to the effects of psilocybin But ultimately you know what we're talking about here is the attempt to re wire the brain in a specific way whether or not it's assisted by oxytocin or some other mechanism so the question is are there trials happening where people are exploring say psilocybin MDMA which by the way we know increases oxytocin and serotonin dramatically as well as um things like atypical anti-depressants in kids that have autism not because we think that those autistic kids are deficient in any of the neurochemical that these drugs would Target but that these drugs can help rewire the brain and ultimately that's what these kids need right I it's a really great point and I there might be subsets of kids right there might be kids where there would be a medication that would Target other Pathways but that potently releases oxytocin right that and but there might be kids that have an oxytocin deficiency right but I think that that circles back to your point at the beginning or our point is that autism is a very heterogeneous condition and being a to know before you begin a trial right like who am I going to put into it and what is my primary outcome like one measure that I think is going to move the needle right like it kind of requires a crystal ball so there's a lot of guesswork that goes into this um but I would very much like to see I I will say one other thing that um there I have a colleague named Adam guella who's at the University of Sydney and he published a paper a year or two ago now suggesting that oxytocin be may be most effective in kids at younger ages and I I don't quote me somewhere between two and or you know two and five or three and six or something find the paper and put it in the show show notes but you know so it could be to your point about neuroplasticity that oxytocin may be maximally beneficial in younger ages right and if you're if these studies are these Haj podes across ages and across sort of different social phenotypes finding that signal is really important right and and maybe age is a driver or or maybe you know low blood oxytocin regardless of what age you are or maybe in Adam's case if you recruit really young children you're likely to see a benefit just because the BL the brain is wiring up and it's more plastic at you know younger ages yeah that's also a vote um in my opinion um for early examination of kids right like parents really need to get autism screen and perhaps maybe the most important thing is to make autism screening as available and as inexpensive as possible for everyone because of the importance of early intervention even if it's purely behavioral intervention but certainly if it's behavioral and Drug intervention but the clinic wait times are really long right so you have to have a specialist who's capable to diagnose autism and so you could have a clinic where you know you're showing Troublesome features and a parent wants to get their kid into a clinic and you could have a 12mth or or 18-month wait time right and so there are a lot of people that are thinking about are there are there laboratory based tests that we can develop maybe either for detection or clinical referral right so could we come up with a a biomarker panel for instance where we might be able to say wow here's some here's a panel where we think this child is at reasonable risk for developing autism can we make sure they're prioritized for getting a diagnosis right so we can get them an an early intervention but right now we don't we don't have that right so having some sort of laboratory based test whether it could be biological um or if we could do something with ey gaze and there's a lot of companies working on these things now to say this may not you know and and also obviously again autism is always controversial in this field right there's so many different stakeholders a lot of clinicians will say well I don't I don't want a 30-second video clip replacing expert clinical opinion there's good reasons for them to feel that way but I think if there was a way to prioritize people that are in this line um you know we could get diagnoses faster well you wouldn't want false positives but I would think that a 30 second video clip provided itself something useful is going to be more valuable than nothing yeah given the time sensitivity uh what are some of the barriers to um getting this behavioral testing to be not just more prominent but pervasive like it seems to me that well I recall in school they gave us the hearing test we all marched on the bus we get the beep test and you know um you know for hearing um challenges uh we get Vision tests you get the babinsky reflex test not the moment you come out of the womb but pretty pretty soon after I mean why isn't this stuff um happening uh for autism um for every kid yeah it's not scalable right so you these interviews with parents and the tests that you do can take hours right and and any given clinician even if they're working really long hours there just aren't that many people that are have the extensive training needed to make these expert diagnoses right and so I think that there's you know clinicians that are doing the absolute best they can but they can only see a certain number of of people a week right and does it have to be a physician sorry to interrupt does it or could it could you know could a well trained technician do this yeah well I mean I I think technically it's a DSM diagnos is right so it's usually somebody who has a clinical degree so it would be a clinical psychologist it could be a behavioral pediatrician it could be you know a child psychiatrist or child neurologist but I mean again that requires years and years of training um and if we look in areas where people have fewer accesses access to Resource I mean particularly in impoverished areas the mean age of an Autism diagnosis is years later than in wealthy areas where you know there's many different medical specialist with parents you know that aren't working three jobs and you know can sit waiting around you know and and really Lobby and and really advocate for their kids right because you know if they don't show up for work that day they're not going to get fired from their job right and so I think that you know if there's some sort of solution that allows there to be a more democratic approach to saying we need a really quick way like you said to be able to identify at risk children especially if it's a a blood test or something like that you know it could be incredibly impactful are there human trials exploring MDMA methylene dioxy methamphetamine also referred to as ecstasy um and oryan for um treatment of autism so I was aware that Maps had an MDMA trial in autism um I don't know what's happened with that yeah perhaps it's still ongoing I'll check the map site in communication with them from time to time I mean the the the reason for asking it of course you know but maybe in case um some of the listeners um don't is the MDMA causes these massive increases in serotonin that seems to be the major source of the MDMA effect so to speak um based on the work of our colleague Rob malanka and um in at least one human study comparing um MDMA to very high does oxytocin treatment ruled out the oxytocin Spike that's induced by MDMA as the as the source or the only source but of course these chemicals can synergize I mean but based on its chemical profile oxytocin release massive serotonin release dopamine release and a propensity to enhance neuroplasticity I mean assuming all the safety protocols were were there um seems like not the perfect drug but not a bad choice um if of course it's inducing the kind of plasticity that someone with autism would be seeking right I mean I think I think the tricky part especially in children right is there's going to be a reluctance to potentially give them psychedelics right and so you know is there a way to modify um you know the chemical compound to you know be something that parents might be more willing to give to their children right right and I totally agree with that um I guess to play Devil's Advocate not against you but um uh well I'll just state it very directly and then I I'll take the heat as necessary um I mean I've done two episodes about the uh the drugs that you know Millions tens of millions if not hundreds of millions of parents are already giving their kids for ADHD which are um include amphetamines including dioxine methamphetamine is actually a prescription drug for a very small subset of kids with ADHD but things like adderal viance even methylphenidate rlin I mean these are amphetamines they induce dopamine release and norepinephrine release and uh again I'm not suggesting people um give their kids MDMA um to try and amarate symptoms of autism but something chemically similar to it ought to be developed or at least explored in a human trial in my in my opinion well time will tell I'll reach out to the maps group and see see what's happening let's talk about vasopress yes because there's a lot to discuss there so you told us this is a molecule that chemically is very similar to oxytocin um is it manufactured in the human brain and body yes okay do we know a subset of the sites that it's known to be produced and where it's of its actions are and you mentioned the kidney and the anti-diuretic hormone um roles but within the brain like what brain areas have neurons that make vasopressin well or have the receptors for I mean The receptors are all over are all over the brain and again it varies depending on the species and you know the way the receptors are measured or in postmortem tissue right which can be very difficult to get good samples right and so we need to have that caveat going in um but yeah I mean it's it's made in the hypothalamus um and it's released all over the brain and there is vasor press and receptors all over the brain right and um what's really interesting about vaser press and I always sort of joke that oxytocin you know always saw its day in the sun if you will and the vasopress was sort of the stepchild that was like left you know sort of behind and and the reason why I find this fascinating is again like I think back to my you know my my roots as a you know evolutionary biologist behavioral neuroscientist and what was interesting is that there were studies in the early to mid 1990 showing that vasopressin was critical for male social behavior and so um there was work you know there was a variety of people and I I think Rob Minka mentioned this on his on on the podcast he did about you know there's a a group of people like Sue Carter Larry young Tom inso some of these early people and they gave Vasa pressen to male Prairie voles and V vasopressin was what induced um pair bonding um with a a female mate and also paternal care and and as I recall those experiments were done in the context of looking at um polygamy versus monogamy of these Prairie VES um Prairie VES versus like a different species so same um genus but a different species so it might be a Montaine V or you know highly related but these other species so Perales are monogamous the males uh well I mean that was the 50% divorce right yeah that was I don't think it's that bad but I think they're doing better than we are as a species that's true we should look to them for pointers and all the divorce folks are saying wait why' you say better I have some divorce friends that have said divorce is like the greatest thing so we always say like doing better doing worse right um anyway that's a whole other podcast um and certainly not the hubman Lab podcast but or maybe it is but um or will be but yeah my understanding is is that you have certain vs that mate with almost exclusively with one other V for their entire lifespan and then you have other vs located elsewhere um that in those colonies they mate with lots of different well so the males and females have lots of different partners um rais young with lots of different partners mating with lots of different partners and that if you give Vasa presson then you can make the I was want to call them polyamorous but I don't know if they love each other I'm going to answer for more and assume they love each other the polygamous moles not polyamorous but polygamous moles then become monogamous well I yeah I would say that is probably not the take-home message so the take-home message would be they had let's say that there was like the good vs right which are the Prairie VES and they were the ones that formed these monogamous parir bonds dad participates in paternal care with Mom they co- ra babies together and then Dad chases off Intruders right and then there's the more Ace social vs and so these are like the Montaine VES um and um we'll we'll see it's a complicated story but there's these Montaine vs where um males and females live separately females like maybe live on the male's territory the male mes with a few different females absolutely doesn't provide any paternal care at all mom raises babies by herself right so that's these are really the like 1950s versus 2020s yes yes to be to to broadly stereotype to broadly stereotype and if you give okay so for Prairie voles they're sort of primed to form bonds and to be the males to be good daddies if you will and all you have to do is give them a single injection of vasopressin and you know or you can give an antagonist and usually the way they form the bond is through mating right so they you put them with a female they mate they cohabit for a bit there's been all kinds of parametric studies I I can't remember how many hours it takes to form a parabond um but then you can do these things called partner preference tests and then you can say here's the guy that you made it with here's this guy you don't know and you can do it for males you can do it for females and they pick their partner they choose to go hang out with their partner the Montaine BS you know either after meting with somebody May either be equal or maybe they'll even go spend time with the new individual so the cleanest story was that Prairie voles are monogamous Mont voles are not monogamous but in the prairie vs you could give vasor pressen instead of mated cohabitation and you could turn on a like you know a bond with somebody after only living with them for a very short period of time right um or you could induce paternal behavior and I was working with a V species in grad school I think the most interesting scientific experience that I've ever had right and you and I both know this right when you're young you're actually the person doing the work right as you become you know the head of your lab you're mostly writing grants and giving talks right and then you get to hear about the super cool things that every in your lab is doing right eventually the the members of your laboratory kick you out of the lab they literally say like get out of here you're leaving things in the wrong place whereas initially you're telling them hey that's in the wrong place within a year or two for me I think it took about four or five years but by about year six right I was um demoted to my office to just write grants and write Pap I was told that one time I was back there and I tried to waigh and I was like so excited what they were working on and they basically just said go write grants and bring in more money right like that was kind of their attitude like we get to be the ones who get to do the cool stuff so back when I got to actually do the science um I remember I had this species where and I and again I told you I came at this from an evolutionary perspective so these were called meadowes and I found them very interesting so when I showed up in my thesis advisor lab she I said I really want to study oxytocin and vasopressin and I really want to study VES and I know you have a v species and she said why I don't have prairie vs I have these meow voles and I'm studying them because they're so sensitive to light and they changed their behavior based on light and I she said well you can do what you want but our grants basically have to have a circadian component and so she said you got to work that in but then we kind of struck this deal so I was hanging out in the animal rooms and I thought it was really fascinating so she had animals that were either on short day lengths or long day lengths so the mimicking some um summer and winter and I was noticing that on winter day lengths the the males were hanging out with the females and when the female had a litter he was like participating and I was like whoa these are not supposed to be monogamous animals and so I went into the field research and they were doing all these radio telemetry studies and so like if you I we should probably explain what those are putting a little transmitter um under the skin it's painless for the animal but that allows the researcher to um monitor the behavior of the animal remotely without having to you know put them in cages and stuff so and so this is like under field conditions and vs are everybody's favorite snack so they have like a very limited lifespan in the wild I mean like on the order of months and and so like if you have a short lifespan like you should just keep reproducing right and so what was interesting is at the end of the summer days as you're going into winter territories collapse and males are found with females and they co- ra babies it makes sense if it's you're going to have a litter and mom needs to get up to go eat you need somebody to sit there and warm those babies or they're going to die because they're going to freeze to death right so I started saying like wow I think these metales are good dats like I'm noticing this and so I told my thesis adviser I want to study how oxytocin invasor press can maybe this is involved in tracking these evolutionary mating strategies and so again like the coolest experience I ever had was on these males that were housed under short day length so they were like winter males um I was able to put Vaso pressent directly into their brains and and it was like turning on a light switch and they ran around the cage picked up all these babies put them in a nest and huddled over them and if you put a placebo into their brain nothing happened and so to me I always filed that away in you know in the back of my mind of like wow Vasa pressin is this really interesting hormone um and maybe someday I will I did a postto on something else but it was always you know back in the back of my mind of I really want to return to this it's so incredible that a eight amino acid long peptide could basically turn these um relatively negligent fathers into very attentive fathers yes yeah it was fascinating right that I mean it just speaks to the power of the peptide baso pressent also speaks to the power of brain circuitry it also speaks to the idea that brain circuitry is often sitting latent in the background you know ready to be activated that it's not just about neuroplasticity and building up a new circuit that some forms of neuroplasticity are about unveiling what's what's already there and that peptides can act like switches um which you know kind of makes sense on the one hand but um I've never heard of a result as dramatic as that so um I'm presuming you're going to tell us that that then LED you to go back to vasopress and explore its ability to induce good parenting and negligent fathers I haven't studied that yet um no well so I think that you know my mom always says Chance favors the prepared mind and so I was doing my postto at Stanford and I got recruited to stay on the faculty and I you know had been doing work in stress vulnerability and stress resilience and I really and I love doing that work but I still felt this tug of you know I had spent all this time in a Psychiatry department where I was surrounded by clinicians and I realized that a lot of the stuff that I was doing had clinical relevance right and so sometimes you sort of meet the moment right and so right as I was transitioning to to have my own lab in my department there was uh a bunch of stuff going on so there were a lot of very dedicated parents who were lobbying for funding for autism research because it was horrifically underfunded really horrifically underfunded wow I mean at rates of one in 36 well not at the time right so it was it was 1 in 150 or whatever it was back then but there were all these parents and and I I mean again they're heroes in my eyes that they ad ated so much for their loved ones and so there was you know they started forming parent Grassroots organizations that have culminated they all started joining together which is now Autism Speaks um and then there was a man named Jim Simons who runs um one of the most successful hedge funds in the world and he decided wow I'm gonna you know there's let's put money into autism right and so does he have a personal link to autism I you'd have to ask him because often times not always but often times when you hear about um wealthy donors um devoting a lot of money to one area of science there's there's a familial thing there you know a member of their family or a close friend has this Challenge and they they really want to see that challenge absolutely I mean a lot of money I've gotten for my lab from philanthropist and what I will say is the most impactful work I've ever done is through philanthropy right there are crazy ideas that no funding agency ever touches right um but yeah so they put they both put um a lot you know there there was a lot of emphasis and so because the s's Foundation started issuing requests for applications there was a group at Stanford that formed and it was um um a clinician with a basic scientist and my chair at the time said well you know almost nothing is known about the biological basis of autism why don't you go I'm going to introduce you to the the the head of child psychiatry you should go talk to this group and so as I Was preparing my slides and realizing that you know social interaction impairments were a core feature of autism I thought wow you know these neuropeptides May really be you know um a part of this puzzle and so that's actually really how I got pulled into um autism research was was through that and it was I I was you know everybody at the time was very interested in oxytocin and you know I remember thinking so we actually did probably the most definitive blood oxytocin um study because there was this idea again like this marketing campaign of like the oxytocin deficit hypothesis of autism and you know given how clinically heterogeneous autism was we got money actually from the Simons foundation and we did the first study with maybe 200 kids um and what we were able to show was that blood oxytocin was not a marker of autism right so it wasn't like there was a bimodal distribution meaning two completely nonoverlapping levels of oxytocin in people with Autism people without autism so the lower your blood oxytocin levels um actually regardless of who you were you could be a child with autism you could be an unaffected sibling with autism or you could be a unrelated control child and it was the lower your blood oxytocin levels the greater your sort of social difficulties and the slopes you know were different they started at different points because the behaviors were obviously different but that's what got us thinking about our clinical trial which is that blood oxytocin level is not going to be this great differentiator between people with and without autism right but we might be able to find a subgroup who could benefit from treatment but what I like so much about your approach the way you described it is that it it sets aside we don't we don't want to say discards but it sets aside this thing that we call autism yeah which is already hard to Define and diagnose and there's all these different spectrums and you're trying to F and just says okay children with autism have challenges in social cognition social behavior social bonding yeah so do adults with autism for that matter matter let's just focus on that yeah and not worry so much about whether or not somebody is diagnosed as Autistic or not and just focus on what are some of the potential neuropeptide deficits or overexpression of neuropeptides that may in some way relate to those Social Challenges right and then one can Circle back to the question about autism in collecting those data but it also points to this idea that like when we when we go after a disease like Alzheimer we can often miss the possibility that Alzheimer's while it has you know deficits in cognition and memory could also be a bunch of other things like a metabolic disorder of the body and so maybe you go after a particular symptomology yeah and try and attack that and you might actually potentially treat or cure multiple diseases it's a very different approach and I I hope um people are catching on to the the subtlety but also the the the potential impact of that um because if I heard correctly you said there are people who are not autistic who have social functioning deficits and they too have less circulating oxytocin right so I would say we haven't studied people where we brought them in and characterized it right so these are typically developing kids but what we did is in the abilities that are typical of a controlled child we still saw that gradient right and so I think it just sort of begs the question about you know what is oxytocin's role in human sociality right I mean I think there's just so much that we don't understand about both of these molecules um in terms of their disease liability if they're low or their healing potential if we are you know able to use them as modulators um of other therapies so how did you move from oxytocin to vasopressin um you mentioned that everyone was was all excited about oxytocin still the one that we hear the most about yeah although after this podcast episode and when I start blabbing about vas oppress to everybody um you know maybe that'll change but it's I think it's going to take a lot more than that but um maybe it's because the name isn't as there's something about oxytocin that like kind of sounds like the love looks like the love hormone but like vasopressin should be renamed right well it should be called something else like not anti-erotic hormone not vasopressin I mean you're going to tell us how critically important it is perhaps even more important than oxytocin for autism and social functioning so I don't know by the end of this podcast we'll we'll come up with a new name I it's needed right well I'll put it out there um uh okay so how did you get to vas oppressor okay so it was interesting with oxytocin because we didn't you know and again I was skeptical that we would see these big group differences but you know it was a little bit of like okay you know what everyone's saying this is not going to be the big solution right um and so I actually came at it from the work that we did in monkeys and so I think I mentioned previously at the beginning of the podcast that there were a lot of limitations that I saw and then sometimes if you come into a field you know when you're you're a little bit of an outsider right like I'm not a clinician I don't see autism patients but I also I have this really strong interest in social behavior and the biology of it and so I I was thinking about what are what are things that we need to do to better address the challenges in autism so one of them was why are we looking in blood right like if you look at neurological conditions there's been a lot of progress made by doing biomarker Discovery in cerebral spinal fluid right so like the the biological substrates or or clues of markers of say um various forms of Dementia or um or MS were for first found in spinal fluid right because it's the it's the fluid that bathes the brain in the spinal column and so if you're looking for the bio chemistry of an illness that's the closest fluid that you can get to the brain right so blood draw just won't do it maybe right so that was part of my thinking but then there was the issue of the animal models right so there was drug after drug after drug that was tested in mice and they failed in human clinical trials and so it made me start thinking could we develop a primate model um of naturally occurring social impairments right so can we because in autism these social impairments are if you will naturally occurring right and so you know this is these spontaneously occur in children um and so it made me wonder could we identify monkeys in a large Colony that have social impairments in and after talking to to clinicians who who treat these children can I spend a lot of time validating a monkey model where there will be monkeys that have features that look like they have direct relevance to core autism symptoms um and so what I did was there's a um primate Center the California National Primate Research Center and so what we did is so I think I mentioned earlier that there's these surveys that can be used to look at autistic traits in the general human population right and so we refined one of these and we did what we call back translate so basically it's an instrument that's used for humans and then what we did is modified it to be able to to use this rating scale in reesus Max which are an old world monkey and I know you're familiar with them and um and I was interested in looking at Old World monkeys because they're some of the closest relatives to human that are used in biomedical research and and um as I mentioned previously these autistic traits are continuously distributed across the general human population and that this genetic uh say let's call it genetic liability which is a fancy way of just saying that we think that there's a there's a genetic risk that underlies this Continuum of Behavioral traits right so if we think that that's true in humans and in one of our closest relatives and we think that some of these genes create proteins that then are what sets up the developing brain to develop in the way that autistic brains develop so let's just assume that that's the premise that's what we went with can we find reesus maacs that are just living in large outdoor colonies and identify animals that might be good um models for autism and the answer is yes we could do this all kinds of different ways one is we could just take people and um score monkey behaviors outside their cages while they're interacting with their peers we can use rating scales and again the rating scale we Ed it's called the social responsiveness scale so this is called the MAAC social responsiveness scale revised it's a mouthful um but what it allows us to do is measure autistic like traits in monkeys and we can also bring monkeys in for experimental test to see where their eyes look or how do they perform how do they respond to videos of other monkeys you know if they're making affiliate of overtures do they um do like you know you know ma goo which is a a positive response well they do that right I I um I'm going to apologize for interrupting you again but I just have to tell people this because I spent time up at the UC Davis primate Center as a graduate student and and by the way what we're referring to here are non-invasive observational studies at least thus far so these are monkeys living in large uh exclosures not enclosures large exclosures um forming colonies and social relationships and um you know I think anyone that sees monkeys at the zoo and we all learn that monkeys go and they don't if you want a monkey to like you you learn this working with macx um first of all they don't the affiliative call is a they do this really nice and the little ones the babies I spend a lot of time with these monkeys and the little ones they do this thing where they go I used to I used to nurse the little ones every once in a while they and they're just you know just like makes your heart melt I think there must have been an oxytocin dump at that moment that's probably happening right now but if you want the monkeys to like you you have to give an affiliative facial gesture which is not a smile that's actually an aggressive gesture so as Karen Dr Parker just showed you it's lip smacking which is so if you see a monkey at the zoo and you want it to pay attention to you you're going to have to lip smack and if it doesn't either you're not doing it right or it just doesn't like you exactly right great all right thanks now we'll go back to the uh the study of uh or the establishment of this really key experiment right so then what we did is we identified these these animals and we spent a lot of time so one one of the things that I do as one of my areas of expertise is validating animal model so a lot of like I mentioned like a lot of reason why experiments fail is people will take an animal off the shelf and say oh I'm going to do this right but if you're you know if you're studying a disorder that's characterized by visual issues is it is it the best thing to do in a nocturnal species that has old faction as its primary sensory modality or you're referring to mice right or is it better you know and again I will say all models have value there's all you know there's reasons you just have to you know you basically have to stand by what you're modeling and so I think one of my the biggest issues I have with a sort of mouse phenotyping Mafia is that you know there's this group of tests that they use and they use it in every single disorder right and then if there's a positive hit it's like oh this is like you know this test is really for Parkinson's today but it's for depression tomorrow right and so so my goal was to to devise very specific tests that would allow us to evaluate you know core features of autism in this model and the answer is we found it right so if you you look at monkeys that spend a lot of time alone they have a much greater burden of autistic like traits measuring on this rating scale they have diminished social motivations so other monkeys will come up and interact with them but they don't engage in um social overtures them that much themselves they do less grooming less uh affiliative um behaviors um they in some of the work that we're doing they don't lip smack back and we can talk a little bit about that we did a pharmacological probe and we can talk a bit about what vasor press does to that which is kind of exciting um and so we spent a lot of time validating this behavioral phenotype right to say that we really feel like there are are core aspects of it that are allowing us to model autism right um and I have a paper which if you want to put it in it's all about creating this monkey model and and and the power of of doing it and where it it took us clinically we will provide a link to that in the show note captions I also just want to um throw up my vote for the the fact that you did this work because again I I don't disparage Mouse model work but we've just seen over and over again that the incredibly small fraction of mouse models that lead to uh valid Therapeutics in humans and that there's just a lot of differences between um primate brains and rodent brains and we have a very elaborate you know frontal cortex a bunch of other circuitry that might if they have the that they probably use it for other things and it's just very hard to com to draw conclusions from those models and and they're they're great for probing um functions that are uh let's just call them more autonomic type functions um and for doing some of the initial investigations but um you know I think while I don't want to see every research lab switch over to primates you know I think one has to be really thoughtful about the kinds of experiments one does with primates at all yeah um this sort of um behavioral assessment and and the identification of a of a primate model for autism seems like a a very good use of of um of Human Resources right well and the other thing I will say is that there were medications that were only tested in rodents that when they were when they were tested in people had really negative consequences I can give you two examples so one is the lamide which was a morning sickness medication that was given to women um that were pregnant um and the safety testing and talks was toxicity testing was done only in mice I didn't know that yes and that's why it went on the market it went on the market in Europe um and there were all these children born with profound lib limb abnormalities when they went back and tested the drug in um marma sets neither rees's monkeys or cinus monkeys an old world monkey they had the limb abnormalities and so all they had to do and again you know I I as an animal lover treat the you know the life of a single monkey or or a single Mouse for that matter an individual monkey excuse me or individual Mouse for that matter as you know as critical I am a species I do think there's a difference between their life and our lives when it comes to um you know what study one does but um but just the idea that these severe developmental defects in humans could have been avoided by doing an experiment perhaps even on one right maret right um and again I feel for the life of discomfort of that maret but um the idea that that could have saved so many human lives it's just striking well and there was also that street drug MP TP that was a synthetic heroin right that caused like overnight parkinsonian ISM right when like I think the dopamine cells were just oblad right but when you went and looked in mice mptp didn't have those effects it was only in primates and other or humans and other primates right so and I agree with you I am an animal lover I I think that we have to be very careful whenever we do any animal experiments right and so you really need to have a good justification I think for any science that's done I will say that upfront um and you know we have this you know new generation of stem cell and organoid work which I think is going to you know allow us to make all kinds of disease progress right so without having to study uh whole animal models or in in complimentary right but I mean I think again I think we need to pick the model based on the question we're asking right and so if you want to have a medication that's safe and well tolerated you know in people um were effective and you want to move the needle on Lex social cognition you want to be testing it in a species that also has complex social cognition look the Netflix show chimp Empire people haven't seen it they should watch it when you watch it you realize they're very much like us yeah and dare I say we're very much like them oh yeah it's uh Far and Away different than watching a bunch of mice yes and I'm not being disparaging of mice I'm assuming they have that mice also have complex social cognition VES also have complex social cognition but it's of the mouse V type and we don't know really even what to look for right but with primates there's you know affiliative gaze there's you know affiliative grooming there's um ostracization of individuals in a troop I mean there's a there's a you know baning taking care of other babies there's all sorts of interesting dynamics that map so clearly onto human behavior and vice versa yeah yeah so you establish this Colony up at Davis um at the regional primate Center that and where you identified some monkeys that we don't if they have autism but you could see that they were less socially affiliative right and I would never say they have autism like I will say that up front you know they have features that resemble human autism and that allow us to model this right so so we started studying those animals and what we wanted to do was do some biomarker Discovery so what we wanted to ask was are there any molecules that allow us to differentiate these what we'll call them naturally low social or low social monkeys from soci socially competent high social monkeys and so we measured a bunch of different um readouts of neurotransmitter systems that were either involved in Maman social behavior had been implicated in idiopathic meaning autism that doesn't have a genetic cause or these neurogenetic syndromes that we've been talking about um where there's Pathways that are really associated with them and so if we measured a bunch of these systems with 93% accuracy without even knowing what the monkey who the monkey was if they were low or high social we could just put them in the low social or high social bucket and was this by blood draw or cerebral spinal this was it was everything we did Blood we did CSF and we put all these measures into the hopper we did a discriminate statistical analysis which was like a machine learning algorithm where we just said here's all this information help me classify if this individual is high or low social for cerebral spinal fluid is collected by spinal tap correct in my understanding I've never had one um but that spinal tap is of course more invasive than a blood draw but it still is um done as an outpatient thing in humans like you can go in get a needle inserted into the lower spine by by an expert um they're going to draw cerebral spinal fluid I mean not that much more invasive and timec consuming than getting a a needle into your vein for a blood draw right I mean it's it's we think of it as it's technically a little bit more challenging um but their CSF draw humans all the time right so in theory this could map to a human study and it did which we'll talk about cool so we went out and we did this I have this spectacular statistician who's we we spend a lot of time together his name is Joe Garner and um and he is a statistical genius and so he developed this and and we do all of our work together or you know I would say 95% of it we just love working together and he developed a statistical winning winwing strategy to identify what were the key drivers and what was fascinating is in this first monkey cohort it was the cerebral spinal fluid levels of vasopressin that were really what was driving this classification right so if we just knew your levels of your of vasor pressent in spinal fluid but not in blood interestingly um we could pretty closely perfect to perfect classify you as high or low social and so then we replicated that again in another monkey cohort because obviously it's a scientists you always want to replicate your work and then if it was really a biomarker meaning it's a molecule in the body that gives us um an indication of something and in this case it's an indication of your Social functioning we were able to look at um monkeys and we saw that the Vasa pressent was consistent across measurement time so there was a wide variety of Vasa pressin levels but within an individual monkey it was pretty much the same right so that's what you want to see with the biomarker and then we showed that the vasor pressen levels were closely uh linked to uh groom SP grooming uh time spending grooming and as we mentioned I think we mentioned earlier grooming is in many monkey species a critical behavior that solidifies social bonds and maintains them and so the individuals with the lowest CSF phasor pressent levels had uh spent the less time the least amount of time in in grooming grooming other monkeys other monkeys yeah this allopathic grooming is a very interesting behavior and um from watching chimp Empire I can tell you that um new relationships are established in many ways by um monkeys these chimps chimpanzees sort of offering their back for grooming and if another um chimp elects to yes groom that um chimp then it establishes some form of trust and it and it all seems to have to do with proximity like how close are you going to let me get to you vice versa in humans that you know we talk about personal space and there's a whole set of things related to consent in this whole allopathic grooming thing and then if they um you know if a if a chimp misbehaves on on an outing then they aren't groomed by others and they can actually get parasitic infections and it can be very costly uh it's very interesting you know uh to just think of alpath grooming as a as not a um kind of a primitive of language but a whole language into itself absolutely yeah and and also just critical for the species so that was really interesting to me that we were seeing these hints that vasor pressin could be you know really important but of course you know somebody will say and I will say upfront monkeys don't have autism right so then the question becomes does this have what's called translational value so you know can I see this observation in an an animal model and will it provide fundamental insights into humans right and so I wanted to get cerebral spinal fluid from people um to test this hypothesis because we had in parallel done a study looking at blood vas oppress levels and people within without autism and we didn't see a group difference there unlike this really profound difference that we saw when we looked at spinal fluid and the monkey and again I think I mentioned the blood vasor press levels were indistinguishable if you were higher low social monkeys so there was something about looking more proximate to the brain that was giving us more information than say the blood alone and so I said I wanted to get spinal fluid and like you said people do this all the time how would we um but we're you know it's not going to be a first pass especially when we don't really have any evidence in people to go in for what we would call a research lumbar puncture right and so I had to get really creative about how do I get spinal fluid from children and what we did was we piggybacked on to a clinical indication for um a spinal fluid draw so and and we did this so I tried to get funding for this this is like you know again I mean I think this is important for people to know how science is done right and so I wrote all these Grant applications nobody would fund it they said that this is really interesting it's too high risk you won't be able to pull it off and you know I don't usually back down from a challenge like if I think think something's a good idea and I want to do it I'm going to find a way to do it if somebody if it's impossible that's one thing but if it's hard to do it doesn't mean you shouldn't do it you just have to figure out how to do it and so I always try to see Bridges where other people see barriers right and so it's like well how can I access spinal fluid and so I went around talking to all my friends who were on and Stanford's really wonderful because it's such a small school right and so you're on all these different committees with all these different people and so lot of committees lots of I can attest lot of Comm exactly but it's really because you're on them with people from all different departments I know people in departments that I wouldn't otherwise know um and you get very uh you get to know these people well in these many committees and where we live it's a small community right so like maybe were the experiment Karen maybe there's a I always wonder whether or not there's a larger experiment right not on monkeys not on the the patients or the Clone but like we're maybe we're the experiment right and they're looking at how we interact on committees anyway please continue so I started going up to people that I knew and said hey if you're you're taking spinal fluid can I get a little bit of extra right and of course we got you know IRB approval meaning we had ethics approval and all this and um or you could get the remnant sample and obviously again get consent from the families so we could either get a little bit extra when it was being drawn for a research indication so so they were getting a spinal tap no matter what and then we were just either we're getting a little bit extra or we were going to getting the remnant that they were going to throw out right so you usually take more than you need because you don't want to have to do another spinal tap right and so we were able to go around and I hustled around and got all these people involved to help me we put um hot pink stickers on the lumbar puncture trays so that in the emergency room so if somebody was doing a spinal tap they would call us so we knew about it and we could get you know samples um again under people's consent um so we got all these people involved and we finally got samples from children with autism and children without autism and then we also made sure that whatever they were being worked up for was negative right so we got the the sort of healthiest people we could given that everybody was coming in for a medical reason to have a lumbar puncture and in this in this first study we had seven children with autism seven children without autism and we could nearly perfectly classify 13 out of 14 individuals by just knowing their CSF vasor pressent level Alone um which is pretty remarkable given that there isn't a biological indicator that we a robust biological IND Ator that we know so basically in this relatively small cohort yeah having low vasopress is the biomarker of autism correct and and again and what I will say is in our monkey studies and in our human studies CSF oxytocin level became our control right so in our monkeys there were no difference in CSF oxytocin by group um and then in this first study um there were no differences in CSF oxytocin levels um uh a sample size of 14 is intriguing but given autism so clinically heterogeneous we want to replicate it and so I knew that there was um a professor at the NIH named um Sue swedo who was collecting uh cerebral spinal fluid in as part of a research study because she was interested in immune parameters and fate deficiency so she had children that were medically healthy and they were getting you know just like at ni you get these huge workups right so they were very well-characterized participants so we were able to look at and again we also this is the first time we were able to look at girls so we had a small sample of girls and we had boys and we basically just asked the question can we replicate this and I was very interested in well will oxytocin be what's different in the girls right so maybe there will be some sex specificity here and that we'll see low CSF vasor pressin in the males and low CSF oxytocin girls that was not the case what we found was that if in the individuals with autism regardless of their um biological sex um that they all had lower CSF phasor presson levels than the individuals without autism and because they were so well characterized we were also able to show on a gold standard research diagnostic assessment of autism so it's a an assessment that's used um uh to in a research situation to validate an Autism diagnosis by an expert clinical opinion that the lower your vasopress levels in spinal fluid the greater your um social symptom severity um your clinical symptom severity and then we asked it's like well vasor press's involved in social behavior but it's not really that involved in restricted repetitive behaviors and that was actually the case so it was the CSF Vasa press and track the social symptom severity not the repetitive symptom severity suggesting that there might be other biological measures that could be included as a way to you know have a more powerful way to differentiate people with and without autism um and so then I was really so so that was really exciting to replicate that um and then I had a colleague named um John Constantino who um is now at Emery but he used to be at wasio and I knew that John I had been at a meeting in I think it was 2010 and I found out that he had what I will call Liquid Gold so he had this uh minus 80 uh C freezer um that was uh had a bunch of um neonatal infant CSF samples that he had from Human infants and he had collected them and again this was under ethical approvals and it was basically they these infants came in for something that needed to be worked up that was very rare um but if they had it they would you know they they could die so they needed to get a medical treatment for it but the the vast majority of these children ended up being healthy so it was a pretty healthy sample if you will right and so I knew he had all these samples and I said to him wouldn't it be really interesting if we teamed up and we look at this uh CSF vaser press finding in children before the period when behavioral symptoms first manifest right and so so sorry again to I'm going to apologize every time no no no I just but I think it's important because this was a question that um I was thinking about earlier and I imagine many other people were too you know you find these monkeys that have social uh interaction deficits you find um kids that have social interaction deficits and you see that there's low vasopress in both groups this extends to male and female children but then of course the question becomes well maybe they have low vas oppress because of so many years or even months of social interaction deficits right that the the direction of causality isn't clear and so yeah when you said Liquid Gold you know referring to the um CSF from these infants um taken prior to any opportunity for social interaction Beyond just you know whatever interaction they had with their their mother up until the point the the CSF draw was taken um this really gets at the issue of causality right so it's a quasi perspective you know because it was banked and then a lot of time went by right and so what we realized we could do was and this was a heroic undertaking on John's part so these were um this was these samples were collected back on paper medical records so he had to trace 2,000 paper paper what's that yeah exactly so he had to trace 2,000 I think paper medical records to an electronic medical record and then what we did is we he looked to see who went on to develop autism and who didn't right so then what we had with spinal fluid samples that have sort of been waiting in the freezer if you will and then we could ask you know do individuals who later receive an Autism diagnosis many months or even years later already have low vasopress levels as infants and the reason why this was a compelling question to ask is there's evidence to suggest that behavioral therapies are more effective the younger the child is right and if you think about it if if behavioral characteristics of autism emerge across development you know what if and this was my this is sort of my we haven't we haven't substantiated this yet but this is like sort of my big question what if all these autism susceptibility genes summon interact and converge upon a few common Pathways in the brain right and so for years people have talked about this excitatory inhibitory balance theory of autism but what if vas oppress is one of those Pathways because it's so critically involved in Social functioning and so what I was interested in and so let let's just say for a moment you know your genes are set at Birth what if the Vaso prestent is already low in the brains of these infants and so it puts them on this very different trajectory where you have this cumulative effect of they're maybe a little bit less socially interested and maybe they're not making the eye contact and if there was a way to intervene really early even potentially with a vasopress and replacement therapy that you might be able to put them on a different developmental trajectory so that was my big what if question and what was really remarkable was so I had been asking John hey can I have your spinal fluid samples and and he finally agreed after he saw a couple of those papers understandably he wanted to make sure that we already had shown something in people and animals that were sort of if you will symptomatic with social impairment and what we found was yes this was the case so it was a small sample it needs to be replicated but individual so infants that went on to have an Autism diagnosis later in life already had low CSF vasor pressent level oxytocin levels did not differ between infants that received a subsequent autism diagnosis and those that didn't so suggesting that we have a biomarker that you know might really be a good readout for you know clinical referral or risk management monitoring incredible so you're telling us that levels of vasopressin correlate with social cognition deficits that right I think that warrants a brief discussion about cerebral spinal fluid I teach neuro Anatomy to medical students so um forgive me for for having to ask this but you know I think of cerebral spinal fluid as the stuff that exists in the ventricles and down the central Canal the spinal cord and provides essential nutrients and uh for neurons and other cell types in the brain but it's also a reservoir for chemicals coming from the brain which is why the spinal tap is useful right um but in the context of a cerebral spinal tap and you're measuring CSF and you're seeing okay lower levels of vas oppress in these individuals with these challenges with social deficits does that mean that they're making less vasopressin does it mean I mean it could have gone the other way too like they're dumping too much vasopressin into the CSF and it's not able to function in the brain like you know what do we know about CSF and what does it mean right well I mean it's a great question so I I think this is just the tip of the iceberg right so I think of the CSF as as sort of like the kitchen sink of the brain right and what we need is real specificity and so I mean my working hypothesis and we'll talk a little bit about pharmacology is that there's a deficiency in um in vasor produ vasor pressent production in individuals with autism but there's a lot of elegant experiments that need to be done to be able to answer this question so we have funding ly to look in um postmortem human brain tissue um to look at um in both blood CSF and hypothalamic tissue where vasopress is made to look at inner relationships right which is very difficult to do but also to see if there's a fewer number of Vaso pressent producing cells and if Vaso pressent gene expression is diminished right because that would help us begin to answer is this a production issue right so if you think back to the Prairie V they're sort of primed to be parental right um or in in my case the mees right but you can do this in any V species well at least the two that I'm thinking of and you put baso pressent into the brain and then all of a sudden it it unlocks this Behavior right so is it possible that children with autism or at least a subset of them um all you have to do is replace vasopress and that there might be a subset of these kids minimally that could benefit from vasor presson replacement if you will is there any evidence for excessive urination in kids with autism which if anyone's going what what why is he asking that if you recall vas supressant is also anti-diuretic hormone um I suppose the other question is could you has anyone looked at levels of a oppress in the urine of autistic kids versus non-autistic kids because it's acting peripherally and um you said blood draws don't reveal any differences um in circulating blood we know that you're urine is filtered blood fair enough but um seems at least worth worth a looky okay so I have this awesome medical student in my lab named Lauren Clark and we with um three different Physicians from different backgrounds so um wrote a perspective piece that's currently under review and it actually asked this question so you know given all these weird medical naming conventions it's possible that this information is existing in information silos in different disciplines right so it raises this idea of if you have low vasopressin so there's a if you really don't have you're not making vasopress you have a disorder called Central diabetes insipidus right which is characterized by excessive thirst um um lots of urination um and and you know bed wedding potentially um and so what we wanted to do was ask has this been missed right so shouldn't there be a subset of kids with autism where we might might be able to look at these other physiological features and say yeah this is the subset we want to be giving vasor pressent to and so she wrote this perspective where we did a little bit of a review and the answerers there's some intriguing um studies that we reviewed in this paper where it looks like and and what's funny is when you read the discussion section it'll be like wow there's all these kids with autism that are drinking lots of water and we don't know why or wow there's a lot of bed wedding but it's not tied to intellectual disability where you might see a lot of bed wedding or something so all of these studies kind of raise this point of like wow this is really interesting um and there's been no big epidemiological study done on this and certainly not any study where people who come at it from brain science and then the the practitioners who are like an endocrinologist for instance which which is where some of these people could show up um are are really connecting the dots so I think that remains to be determined but we are actually about to launch a study to to investigate this right I was meeting with Lauren yesterday about it so um it's a really good question and I hope to have information on it in the not to distant future as I recall alcohol is an antagonist of vasopressin so Al there's a lot of different drugs that could interact with vasor pressent and so one thing I'm interested in is are there any drugs that release vasor pressent as a side effect and could some of them be mobilized to treat autism we also know that like um acupuncture can release phaser and there's been some studies done in Rats on that um and so one question would just be are there any alternative therapies where we can be relacing vasor pressent naturally or do we need to you know do a replacement study where we give you know intranasal vaser press into children with autism right and of course I'm I'm not I want to say I'm not advocating that people go out and do this on their own right like I'm I I'm a big proponent of randomized clinical trials where you assess safety right and efficacy yes science science medicine right but I appreciate you saying that yeah um some years ago so this would be mid90s um there was a small but very active subculture that I was not a part of okay I swear um that were combining GHB gah hydroxy butyrate um and vasopressin as um combination quote unquote sex drugs really yes yeah um and I don't know the rationale for including Bas oppress was in any case whether or not that's by way of enhancing social bonding or a direct effect on sexual arousal itself is still unclear but in any event since we're talking about Bas oppressing maybe you should tell us about the actual science of uh vasopressin sorry maybe I should allow you to tell us about the actual scientific study of vasopressin um in other words what happens if you give people Vasa press in a controlled environment not the sort of environment I'm talking about but a controll and the one thing I will say because I have people contact us all the time saying where can I get vasor pressent and what I would say is vasor pressen means you know you're having effects on blood pressure you're having effects on really important right vasod right and vas the dosing has to be appropriate you know you don't want people just going and trying this because there could be really severe adverse effects right so that's why we've been studying this in a in a controll clinical trial right so um I teamed up with Antonio Harden who's the child psychiatrist that um I've been working with for years and we did the first sort of first inclass vas oppress treatment trial in children with autism so again this was everyone was unaware of who was on basor press whether it was the family or the clinician who was doing the evaluation um and then it was randomized Placebo controlled um and then we basically gave um vasor presson again twice a day for four weeks um to children they were about 6 to 12 years of age and then we had a primary outcome measure which was the social responsiveness scale we could get into discussions about what a primary outcome measure should be you know wouldn't it be great if there was a biological measure um but this is sort of what had been used in the past and something that the FDA approved us using I was partly interested in using the SRS because we had used it in monkeys right and we had shown at least in monkeys we've never looked at this in people because of you know the lack of available samples but that monkeys in this general population that we've looked at there's a continuous distribution of these SRS scores that relate to the CSF vasor press levels and so what was I wanted to know if we use the SRS as an outcome measure and we're administering vasor presson can we change you know the scoring on this instrument based on our animal data so SRS is social social responsiveness scale corre um without going into a lot of detail because we can always refer people to the paper and I think most people just want to understand the top Contour um the SRS presumably has to do with um how often the kid uh interacts with another kid how often they initiate that interaction versus on the receiving end things like affiliative play um how often they look at one another versus averting gaze um these kinds of things yeah and then there's also um a little bit about restrictive repetitive behaviors so even though it's called the social responsiveness scale there's also an assessment of other features of autism in it but you can sort of think about it as a quantitative way to assess features of interest in autism and this was related to our biology and the monkeys and so then we use this as this outcome measure um in our trial and and you know as a as an experimentalist I have this sort of trust but verify right so you want to you want to see the same thing over and over and over again right like scientists like repetition and so we had Parents fill out um their impressions of what the child's uh Behavior was you know before and after being on the medication we also had a clinician make an evaluation but we also had the kids perform laboratory based tests where they would see like I mentioned that the um reading the mind in the eyes test or we would show them a picture of a a face and say what emotion is this and so we were able to have what's called um converg in validity right so it's a fancy scientific term to say do all these measures that we think should be related are they related and are we seeing the same thing and um the answer was yes so that when we gave children with um autism vasopressin versus kids with autism of placebo the kids who were treated with vasopressin showed um increases in Social abilities on parent report clinician evaluation and child performance on laboratory based tests wow um was that um was that immediate like they they did the nasal spray and they immediately started um receiving and and initiating more social engagement or was this a buildup over time and what I'm getting at here is whether or not this is the reflection of a short or longer term neuroplasticity like where there structural changes in the brain or or is this something that was more acute um we don't know the answer to that so we basically looked at dosing with the idea that we would you know and and again I think we've mentioned this about um limitations on like there's so many things that a scientist would like to do but you always limited by a budget right and so when we started this work again it was like philanthropic shoestring budgets right and so you had to really be laser focused on what are the things that we can do on the budget at hand so unfortunately we didn't do like EEG or brain Imaging or other things that would be I think potentially very interesting to do because you might be able to see an early signature of response right so maybe after the first dose let's say wow like there's some interesting changes that are predictive of somebody who would be a resp responder to the medication and we don't know that yet um but we do know after this 4-week period that we we saw you know these changes and in then in a subset of kids we actually saw diminished anxiety and also diminished restricted repetitive behaviors um so suggesting that the vasor pressent effect may not only be on um social behavior have you ever just wanted to try or tried vas oppress you know I haven't but you're in a Psychiatry Department after all and I not suggesting that members of the Psychiatry Department are constantly testing the drugs that they use on their patients with themselves but but I've had several members of this department of which I'm a courtesy member um member by courtesy any event and we'll see if I'm still am after what I'm about to say uh Dr Carl dth who's a clinician our first guest on the huberman Lab podcast also a phenomenal neurobiology researcher uh David Spiegel um Rob malenka um and others um that I've spoken to you know I think all of whom said you know that they felt as clinicians Rob's not a clinician but anymore right but as a clinician that they felt almost a responsibility to understand the effects and side effect profiles of the drugs that they were giving their patients which I saw not as Renegade or experimental but rather as very compassionate like seeking empathy um so I'm curious have you ever just snuck a little little no no I never have but there is a long history Medicine of people trying out they believe so much in their solution that they go and vaccinate their family with the new vaccine that they've created or they try the medication themselves right so MDMA was developed by Sasha kogan in a laboratory in the East Bay first by a pharmaceutical company in the early 1900s but then kind of disappeared it did disappear and then it was resurrected independently in the in the 19 I think 70s and 80s and then now it's one of the um sort of hot topics items for the treatment of PTSD still in late phase clinical trials still illegal but um self-experimentation is is one of the central themes of Psychiatry frankly yeah I mean I guess I you know it's I Pro I got in trouble in class for being too social right so so I guess I've never it might send you over the other spot yeah yeah exactly who knows but no I I never no and the thing is is that these oxytocin Vasa pressin and again these are done and this is this is something that I think we've hit on over and over again in the podcast is you need to know who's you're studying right what's the species who's the individual you know most of these have been done in you know neuro I mean a lot of the oxytocin and a little bit of the vasopress work the single dose work was mostly done in in what we'll call neurotypical people right just asking can we move around social behavior by just giving this single Drug Administration most people that are neurotypical didn't say that they could tell if they were on the drug or the placebo right so interesting so I think the question really becomes you know drugs have different you know they work differently based on the individual who's taking them so if you have a neurotypical individual and you give them Vaso presson you know maybe they'll self-report that they don't see a difference but if you had somebody who isn't producing enough phas of presson maybe you know they would self-report after a period of time or maybe even after the first dose wow I really see something different right did any of the kids uh report how they felt they just said like wow I I like playing with other kids more were they self-aware in that way and um also feel free to mention if it feels right to you any um let's let's consider two outlier cases one spectacular result if that you know a kid that went from very socially isolated to you know maybe very gregarious and um but let's also balance that with another outlier the the kid with low Vasa presson who took Vasa presson who for whom there was no significant shift I'm presum that the data set you probably obser something like each of those yeah so I mean what I'll say is that um so yeah I mean there were definitely kids who didn't respond to the medication I mean one thing I think it's important to say and again this was a small pilot trial right we're in the process of replicating this in a much larger sample so you know as a scientist again you want to say okay this is really intriguing and interesting and I've invested a lot in you know this monkey model and then doing all the CSF work in patients to suggests that there may be a there there here but I want to see it replicate um we did have an article um that Stanford medicine I can send you the link um they they were able to I think interview a family that had been in the trial um and so obviously there's patient privacy and you know you have to they have to say it's okay to talk about it but this is a family that was contacted I think they were Anonymous but this is in this report um and they basically said the the dad said that his son was walking around the he was on Vasa presson and his son was walking around a grocery store and he like was looking for him and he turned around and he said he was Gob smacked because his child was you know just talking to making chitchat with somebody like in an aisle and he said he had never seen that happen before um and so you know we do have anecdotal reports like that and I think you know the tricky part is are we we didn't stratify anyone going into this trial right and so the concern always is did we get really lucky in the first trial and we somehow got the the quote unquote right people that entered the trial that we're going to be the ones who would respond to the medication or is this a medication that has sort of broad use in this population and we you know the second trial will be um positive you used nasal spray to deliver the vasopress and and um presumably that gets into the blood circulation of the brain um and supplies neurons with vasopressin but it's very non-specific and I'm not criticizing but if you think about you just putting a bunch of vasopressin into the brain and if people wonder why this is that it's because basically you have neurons of your central nervous system um are part of your factory system and believe it or not right behind your where your nose meets your forehead um the brain is right there there's a little bit of bone and then the brain is is is right there so um one of the reasons you can get in there um and it's easier than an ocular injection or something that wouldn't be a good approach and it's easier than a peripheral in injection into the vein but at the same time I have to presume that this I'm imagining this V supress just kind of like preting through the brain binding to whatever receptors happen to be there you said The receptors are everywhere and then this significant Improvement in social cognition right so that raises all sorts of interesting questions about like what are what relevant circuits are impacted um or is it some Global Inc could it be some global increase in kind of awareness of surroundings um although some autistic kids are overwhelmed by their awareness of surroundings so um yeah what are some thoughts about how vasopress might be working to exert this this really impressive and frankly important effect right so I mean could it increase social motivation does it you know like so let's talk about like how sort of complexity of social um sensory processing is it that were directing attention to social cues where there wouldn't have necessarily been as much iess right um are we increasing social motivation which would suggest from some of the animal studies may actually be happening right um we don't know and I think that's partly when you have other models or if you're able you know to do imaging studies I mean one thing that's been a little bit of a Holy Grail in this field is that if we could get um tracers that are um basically like a you know a molecule that would allow us to inject it into somebody and then visualize the brain like if I'm thinking about a pet trace or a radi liend where you could then ask questions about you know what's happening in the brain can we can we give vasor pressent in the context of a you know functional brain Imaging scan and ask like where is the vasor press and binding what kind of circuits are involved like that needs to be the next step of the work to know like where where our targets are and you you can do something like functional proteomics right where if you know where basa press and receptors are you can overlay that with studies of functional brain Imaging right and that would allow you to say these areas are dense in phasor press and receptors and do we see similar responses in what we call bold signal on a on a brain scan so let's let's be more colloquial about this like do certain areas of the brain light up if you will where we know vasopress and receptors are are densely distributed um in ways that we know are tied to social motivation or or social salience or other things that we think could be moving the needle here um in the trial how is this happening and and I think you know one thing the reason why we did this work is and I think it speaks to what you said earlier is there is an urgency on the part of parents to say you know my child's brain is developing right and and there's a sense of that them you know by the sort of Western model has failed a lot of people you know they look to doctors and say what are what are the solutions and doctors will say well we have a limited number of tools in the toolkit here we just don't know right and so you know one of the reasons why they did that big oxytocin study was that people were trying to get the oxytocin anyway so it was like let's just make sure that this is safe let's see if it's effective and so some of our thinking was you know as soon as some of this work hits you know like it get and some of the work is been covered by the media and so you know our feeling was we can give this intranasal um and we can do it under safe monitoring ways um and so people are going to think about doing these things anyway so let's just make sure that this is safe and let's test this in a rigorous way so we don't know the mode of action but then our feeling is is that you know at least from the initial safety data it looks pretty safe um and you know and so the idea would be and there's a long tradition in Psychiatry if we don't know the the mechanism of action but if we have a medication that can be impactful and improve the lives of people with Autism and we can diminish suffering and people can more readily reach their full potential you know to me it actually seems unethical not to move forward in a way that's scientifically sound Amen to that this seems like a good time to raise the topic of the microbiome and not as an unrelated topic and and here's why um I've seen a fair number number of studies in Mouse models arguing that in a mouse model of autism which now frankly I have to kind of wonder about the the um Power of that model but anyway the models are out there in the field um that fecal transplant into a host that does have social deficits and rescue some degree of social deficits I don't know if this has actually been done in humans as well and for those of you that are cringing yes they do feal transplants in humans for treatment of obesity and a bunch of other things um this isn't because scientists are obsessed with feal matter it's because um feal matter contains a lot of the microbiome elements um so the microbacteria of the the of the gut um and the reason I'm raising this now is you know one possibility and it it's not mutually exclusive with a brain mechanism is that the administration of vasopressin somehow rescued a vasopress deficiency in the gut so the questions are as follows is there any evidence that vasopress is manufactured in or impacted by the gut microbiome of humans we'll just start with humans since I think most and um because that would that wouldn't be a Smoking Gun but it' be an interesting detective story well okay so the one piece of evidence that I will say that I find provocative and fascinating and one thing I want to say is I I think there's really great work done in mice I don't want to be a mouse Basher so I want to just like sort of go on the record that I'm not bashing other models um if it's a conser so I think about everything from like an evolutionary perspective if a mouse shares a brain structure with a human and it's highly conserved you know Mouse work can be incredibly important and very impactful right yeah my my lab did years of mouse work some primate work where necessary um now I only work on humans um but um absolutely it has it has its uses um but clearly the primate model for social um deficits as it relates to autism you you at least have me convinced that that one has a lot of power let's just say that exactly okay but I'm going to now say there is a really cool Mouse study that was done that I found and there's been you know lots of different studies so there's been mice so there's these like I said these genetically modified mice that have genetic syndromes that are you know where the individuals have social impairments and some of these individuals and again here's a here's a problem with a field often they will measure oxytocin but not vasor pressin right so like they're not often both measured together which I always do now um but there's been some really interesting evidence that in these Mouse models that and and again multiple studies but like certainly low blood oxytocin levels in these Mouse models what and and with the sense that maybe they have some sort of abnormal gut microbiome and then what they've done is they've given a probiotic to these mice normalize their social functioning um and that in there's an increase in oxytocin and in a recent study also vasopressin at the level of the hypothalamus so by giving a probiotic you I believe the oxytocin levels were increased in the blood you saw more species typical social behavior and this was all driven by this upregulation of oxytocin gene expression and also vasor pressent in this very recent study and what's interesting is there's this nerve called the vagus nerve which is uh it's I think it means the wandering nerve vagam it's for Vagabond yeah exactly right and even it's in the gut but it actually has a direct projection to the nuclei and the hypothalamus where oxytocin and vasor pressent are made how interesting yes and so when you sever the Vagas you then in this one study it's a neuron paper um I think it's like 2020 it's a super cool paper and then what you do is you decrease the gene expression and you don't see the rescue of the oxytocin levels or the social behavior in this model so so another words if I interpret this correctly and I'll go look up the paper and provide a link to it um they're they're by increasing the diversity of gut microbiota because that's really what a probiotic does sort of across the board increases the diversity of gut microbiota no one specific ilis as I always say because they all seem to end in ilis you know multiple Iles Iles ilsy here we go again um you upregulate gene expression and thereby action of oxytocin and vasopressin in the hypothalamus but that's a neurom mediated thing it's not as if the microbiota travel to the brain something changes in the gut which activates the vagal pathway from gut to the specific nucleus in the brain and um we know that the vagal pathway is involved because it seems at least partially necessary if you sever that you give a vagotomy then the uh this effect is is blunted or eliminated that's very interesting and and ties the microbiome to oxy invasor Preston production in a neural and somewhat causal way um and makes the data on fecal transplants make a lot of more sense because I always wondered okay so you take a you know taking the microbiota from one animal putting into another animal you're creating you're transferring the millu of the gut but it doesn't say anything about mechanism right so this this is a really cool fascinating and there's also a study I've always wanted to do is you can get a vagal nerve stimulator they used to do them as implants right but you can also get one that you sort of clip onto the ear and I've always wanted to ask if we we use this in autistic individuals and you know could we increase like can we alter social behavior right and would that be something that we could actually measure in the blood especially if we're seeing this this change in these blood levels right are you doing that experiment no but I've always I've I've always thought it would be we we have to get you the to do that experiment and and I know a few times you've raised the issue of funding it's not something we spend a lot of time on this discussing on this podcast but I think what should be abundantly clear to the listeners um throughout the course of this episode is as you mentioned ear you're very determined to get work done you'll figure out a way but the way I describe um finances and and research is that it's absolutely necessary but it's not sufficient you of course have to have the right people in the right lab head directing the work but no money no no project and it and it is disappointing to see that despite the federal budget for research being um you know still reasonable it's not what we would like it to be um it's still very hard for amazing worldclass Labs like yours to say Hey you know listen there's this vagel thing and clearly there's a rationale it's not like you're pulling this out of out of nowhere and um you want to go do this study but what we're really talking about is three to five years of grant writing before you could even initiate that study meanwhile autistic kids are going from Age 2 to 5 to six these are critical windows so if ever there was a um there was a rationale for um you know moving a lot of funding to uh you know I don't even call it highrisk but you know logically sound hypothesis testing for the treatment of autism it's it's now so I'm I'm going to get active on on this front so I won't get into how but you know uh when I get something in my uh in my neural circuits for for talking they tend to not shut down for a while well there will be a community that is is going to be immensely grateful well it seems like um the parents of these kids and the kids themselves could greatly benefit so um you mentioned that the first study on um vpress Administration that saw these improvements in Social functioning you said a small cohort how many how many kids was It ultimately that you could use data from okay so we had I mean you screen a lot so I think our you know because we had very rigid criteria so we ended up with 17 kids that were on active drug and 13 that were on Placebo and then not a study no and the placebo CH we we always have like a humanitarian open label extension arm which allows for anybody who is in Placebo can get access to the drug so both Antonio and I feel very strongly about making sure that if we're doing a medication trial everybody can benefit from it right so afterwards if they say okay I was in the placebo group but I really want the chance to try this thing they can't but then you also get more data we get right so I think when the families are now aware that their child is on basor pressent and the clinicians are aware you know you really want there's a huge Placebo response rate right and so I mean it's not a placebo response rate here but but we really would want to make sure that our evaluation of the social behavior is done unaware to the medication but you can get good safety data right so so you can have those you know 13 children who were on Placebo we can then also make sure that their blood chemistry Labs look good that their cardiograms look good right and so that also allows us to assess safety parameters in a greater number of children in a fairly broad literature search I was able to find okay microbiome so feal transplant is something that people are excited about as weird and there are trials in people with Autism ongoing in using feal transplants okay oxytocin nasal spray presumably still being investigated by some groups or it's been abandoned well I think it's mostly been abandoned because there's no funding priorities for it right so so I know that maybe in Australia because of Adam's positive findings that I I don't know what his plans are but maybe he's doing work there um there might be a little bit of work with behavioral therapy and oxytocin but this is the problem when there's one big trial that fails the funding just completely dries up so even if there's promise I don't know a single funding agency that's going to touch it got it um and then there's the Vasa pressen Administration work that you're doing right I think it's worth contrasting that work with the Fairly large trial that was done by a major pharmaceutical company exploring the role of vasopress in for the treatment of autism um you could tell us what they did because it's basically the opposite of what you did um and you can tell us the outcome because I think that if anything that study um in advertently Provide support for the results that you observed which is that administering let's say increasing Bas oppress levels in the brain seems to um ameliorate some of the social deficits of autism right so um Ro had a compound called bapin which was a vasopressin v1a receptor antagonist which basically means there's um I think I mentioned there's these four neuropeptide receptors and oxytocin vas are present binding to each other's receptors but the v1a receptor is the one that is um most implicated in social behavior um and so they had and this is the tricky part about when medications are developed in in Pharma versus in academics right in academics there's definitely this transparency we write grants the abstracts are are publicly available we register our trials they do too but a lot of the shall we say early development is all put out in Publications right and then it's also peer- reviewed and there's you know an open trail of why we're doing what we're doing but in a pharmaceutical company you know they have the ability because also they have all the funding to be able to do all kinds of development that may never see the light of day because of the proprietary basis of it right and so you know when you go back to so it's not it's it still is not clear to me why they took the approach of using an antagonist to the main Vaso pressent receptor in the brain um what's interesting is if you go back and you look at the animal literature there are hamsters that if you give them vasor presson they become aggressive right and if you give male Prairie VES vas op press they can become aggressive but let's think about the context that they're doing this in these hamsters that show aggression are asocial they live by themselves if you give them vas oppress and the only social repertoire they have is to you know have sex with a female or to fight a male that they see they have a very limited social rep right and when the Prairie V male is be is being given vasopressin it's often in the context of PR like um protecting his mate and his offspring and so then it's actually species appropriate for him to attack a Marauder male on his territory who's going to you know kill his babies right and so so my thinking in reading the preclinical literature the animal literature was that all right that makes a lot of sense in the context of those species but we've never seen any evidence in our Tri aggression didn't change we also have an aggression measure in this current in the current trial as well but you know for me the vast majority of evidence from the animal literature suggested that Vasa presson was pro-social um and that you know especially given our our CSF findings like over and over across species across studies across ages that we we should be giving vaser presson especially given the correlations between vaser presson in CSF and symptom severity and autistic traits you know the former and people and the latter in the monkeys um and so they had some preliminary studies that I believe were maybe single dose one that they published um but then they had a trial where the primary outcome measure the social responsiveness scale was negative and then they had um some secondary measures that maybe showed some promise and then they were conducting another trial um and then did a futility analysis and I know they stopped the trial and I don't think it was for safety reasons but again you know a lot of this isn't made public right because it's a pharmaceutical company so you know we we will see because we are going to be completing our larger trial you know this year and you know as they say the proof is in the pudding so we will see if you know we can replicate our initial pilot findings well sounds like they got it backwards that blocking vasopress Pathways would just make things worse and that augmenting Vis oppress and makes things better um although that last statement um needs to be supported by this more extensive population well I think you know there's been a lot of speculation and maybe there are people closer to the trial than me who might be able to speak to mechanism but you know I would meet the RO people at conferences and they would come to my talks and I would always ask him like what's the mechanism of action why are you antagonizing the system when we're giving you know a Vasa pressent Agonist if you will and you know some people had said well maybe by blocking the Vasa presson recept you know there's a way to have oxytocin me be more bioavailable that sounds like some gymnastics yeah yeah I totally great and so I've never had a I I've never received a compelling response from anybody about why they did their trial and then you know the differences I mean when when this was ongoing and you know there was potentially room for both right um you know maybe I thought that maybe there's some some optimal band of Vasa presson signaling in the the brain right and so maybe there's some people where they have too much vasopress and some who have too little right and so this was a lot of maybe but it it doesn't to me seem like that's the case especially if our current trial has a positive rate out I'd be remiss if I didn't ask for your stance and uh read of the landscape on the data about vacines and autism I'm not talking about covid vaccines here I want to be really clear about that but there was a theory uh running about um not just in the Press but in um the scientific literature for a while that uh vaccines could cause autism yeah that was proposed um my understanding is that was debunked that idea still lives on the internet um but what is the evidence or let let's say let's go through this sequentially what was the idea what was the evidence for that idea and then what caused the demise of the the at least the scientific support for that idea leaving open of course that new data may come right but let's talk about what is known now right and I think what I will say is being evidence-based is is sort of like something that all scientists should strive for right and so so the the backstory on this is there was a guy named Andrew Wakefield who published a paper um and he basically said the preservatives and vaccines are causing autism so not the specific vaccine but the adant the stuff that's preserving the stuff that's keeping the the vaccines um bio effective right at least that was my understanding right that's mine as well and so and and then it turn I want to be clear because the internet is is a is a cruel and um diabolical place my stance is that that was the hypothesis I don't agree with that stance right okay right and so or if we want to just back up a little bit broader there was this idea that something about vaccines were causing a um autism but the study was debunked he lost his medical license and the paper was retracted right well he lost his medical license on the basis of the fact that the study was wrong or was there think he F the data there were that's why I recall as well that there was evidence of him literally making up the data right right so it wasn't a case of like sloppy technique it was a case of of intentional fraud right that's my understanding again what was the did anyone ever like look into what his motivation for what what it was like why someone would I mean threw away his whole career right yeah I don't I don't know um but but I think the hard part about that is understandably people got very frightened right that we're doing something to our children that could have you know un unanticipated consequences and you know when something like that happens then we dump a you know we we spend a lot of money investigating it and so the the the good news is at this point there have been multiple multiple studies that haven't shown a correlation between you know vaccines and autism I do believe the preservatives have been changed as a result so that's something we should check um that you know that might be something where you know there's been a public health change on preservatives that are in vaccines that's interesting in its own right I mean we don't want to cause alarm if um but that's that's interesting you know that that in this data fraud case it might have cued people to the idea that certain things might have been um needing change even though it wasn't the specific issue that this uh this fraudulent researcher was focused on the change was made to make sure people would vaccinate their children right like so this is something that I think we should have lots of caveats here like you know post the post the studies like make sure that what we're saying is accurate right but I but I think that my concern is that we've spent you know so the good news is that you know the Maj like every single study that I'm aware of does not not show a relationship between vaccination and autism right and so I think that most scientists and medical doctors that I know that are part of like the you know standard biomed research Community do not believe the vaccines cause autism they vaccinate their own children you know they recommend vaccinations to other people's children um and and so I think that's where we are um you know could I just ask a question um uh and I feel more than obligated to do this because I I don't you know I think I have a pretty good finger on the pulse of the listenership of this podcast but I think there's a range of of stances on this um where some people um have a lot of trust in the standard medical establishment others have less right trust in the standard medical establishment and I wouldn't be doing my job if I didn't try and represent um all those sides um and you know one thing that I've heard okay is that over the last 20 or 30 years there's been a dramatic increase in the number of vaccinations that kids get and I don't know if that's true but when we say vaccinations we could be talking about you know measles Mom's forella right um polio um we could also be talking about measles bumps forbell polio flu shots every year rabies vaccine technis vaccine H HPV right with one that wasn't even available when I was in in college you know as a everyone in college was was well aware there wasn't an HPV vaccine um didn't change people's behavior a whole lot but um you know there's there's a vaccine there's multiple vaccines and then there's you know all the vaccines yeah right and I think that one of the concerns that I hear about um is the idea that okay there's some critical vaccines but then which ones are perhaps less critical if any um and these are the kinds of discussions that are starting to surface um and that you know have parents and potential parents you know rightfully thinking about this stuff and and no one really knows where to get the information but like I'm I I've tried and I can't find a pediatrician that says Hey listen these but not those or you can certainly find board certified Physicians that say many and certain board certified Physicians that say none you actually can find those um the none category tend to hide themselves a little bit more than others for obvious reasons but it's hard to get a sense of like which which vaccines are critical and which ones aren't if you're a parent and you're not versed in this stuff and so you could imagine that like people are you know kids are taking many more vaccines and only some of those are critical or maybe all of them are critical well I think I guess the way I would maybe turn it on its head is that you know because of this this study that did in some ways so much harm right like we SPI study we spent I I I don't even want to Hazard a guess about how much money worldwide went into studying you know the the you know vaccine and autism based on a fraudulent data right like that's to me a real tragedy but at the time they didn't know it was fraudulent exactly so they went after this thinking it was true okay but I think I think the thing the consequence of all this that I think is also extremely sad is that everybody because everyone got so riled up and so fearful there has been historically until recently many researchers who were like oh man I don't want to touch IM mology and autism with a 10-ft pole right and yeah you know and I I wouldn't consider myself Fearless but like my lab never had any reason to work on those yeah on those important problems but I'll tell you like it seems like a it's not a kettle of fish it's it's a ball of barbed wire with a bunch of you know Napalm burning around it and you know I mean you say one thing your your career is ending you say the opposite thing your career is also ending you know it's it it's it's a it's a mess but but I think this highlights that there are so many parents you know again and I think we need to listen to parent stakeholders right like you know there's there needs to be a dialogue whenever anybody's studying any illness to to talk to the people who are involved right and and I think that there are parents who will report wow like there are there is immune system disregulation in my child and but because of this historical issue with vaccines it's only been very recently that I think people scientists medical doctors have said okay we're hearing a lot about this from parents and are there a group of individuals who have you know um immune issues that could be driving their autism right we don't know and everything should be evidence-based but I think that like you said with this cancel culture and all this fear scientists sometimes will pick topics very judiciously based on you know like hey I just want to be left in peace and I'm trying to help this community and if there is areas of the Enterprise that you think are going to cause all kinds of grief then people are going to be less reluctant to study them even if it's critically needed well that's a a perfect place to say thank you I realize you're not addressing the vaccine autism issue directly but you're so clearly going after the target trying to figure out what are the biological mechanisms that are disrupted in autism and by extension other deficits of social function in kids and adults you've identified this incredible relationship between vasopress which should have more prominence in my opinion than oxytocin its lesser cousin just kidding oxytocin lovers um but also have shown you know yes in a small study but you're now extending this to a larger cohort as you mentioned uh a causal relationship when B oppress is administered to these low vasopress SL low social functioning kids their symptoms improve so I I know I speak for many people when I say that um I truly appreciate your doggedness in in going after this problem especially on the complicated landscape of lack of funding for doing novel and truly high-risk work um especially on the backdrop of the sociopolitical landscape around autism it's a complicated thing even to discuss you know as I mentioned in the introduction you know we had to have some fluency around autism so we sometimes said autistic sometimes we said people with Autism you know I mean it's a it's a tough one but in order to make progress real progress in this area we need people like you we need you and you're doing it to get in there and just go okay you know let's get at the biological functions let's get at the novel treatments and you're making amazing progress so I'm so grateful that you're doing it and that you'll continue to do it and that you came here today um to teach us what you've been up to um I'm oh so grateful and I just want to say thank you for that and that we absolutely have to get you back here uh to give us an update on your progress really soon and and again and again and again thank you so much I love being here all right well I've Loved this conversation and um I'll sign off by saying folks this is how diseases are cured thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Karen Parker about the biological basis of social functioning and autism to learn more about Dr Parker's research please see the links in our show note captions if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zero cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a five-star review if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guess you'd like me to consider on the hubman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube I do read all the comments please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast not so much on today's episode but on many previous episodes of The huberman Lab podcast we discuss supplements while supplements aren't necessary for everybody many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like improving sleep for hormone support and for improving Focus to learn more about the supplements discussed on the hubman Lab podcast go to live momentus spelled o us so live mous.com huberman if you're not already following me on social media I am huberman lab on Instagram X formerly called Twitter LinkedIn Facebook and threads and at all of those places I discuss science and science related tools some of which overlaps with the content of the huberman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the content covered on the hubman Lab podcast so again it's hubman lab on all social media channels if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network newsletter our neural network newsletter is a zeroc cost newsletter that comes out every month it includes podcast summaries as well as protocols in the form of short PDFs of maybe just one to three pages where I list out the specific protocols for instance for improving dopamine functioning or for improving your sleep or for deliberate cold exposure deliberate heat exposure or Fitness protocols and on and on all of which are presented in brief fashion very direct just the protocols listed out again completely zero cost to sign up you simply go to huberman lab.com go to the menu function scroll down to newsletter and enter your email and I should point out that we do not share your email with anybody thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Karen Parker and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in [Music] science

========================================

--- Video 164 ---
Video ID: 50BZQRT1dAg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=50BZQRT1dAg
Title: Robert Greene: A Process for Finding & Achieving Your Unique Purpose
Published: 2023-12-04 13:00:07 UTC
Description:
In this episode, my guest is Robert Greene, multiple New York Times bestselling author and expert on human psychology and behavior both at the individual and group levels and in the context of relationships, careers, and society. We discuss how to find, pursue and achieve one’s unique life purpose, and how to best learn from good and hard experiences along that journey. We discuss power dynamics in relationships, the different types of human communication and the interplay between seduction and vulnerability. We discuss how to find the right romantic partner, improve healthy self-awareness, the link between anxiety and creativity, and pick ideal mentors and role models. Robert also discusses his recent stroke and what he has learned from his near-death experience about motivation, urgency and appreciation for life. Listeners of all ages will benefit from Robert’s insights on navigating the process of building a deeply purposeful life and enhancing one’s relationship with the self, others and society. 

Use Ask Huberman Lab, our chat-based tool, for a summary, clips, and insights from this episode: https://go.hubermanlab.com/e8qm6c

*Thank you to our sponsors*
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
ROKA: https://roka.com/huberman
Helix Sleep: https://helixsleep.com/huberman 
Waking Up: https://wakingup.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman
Momentous: https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

*Huberman Lab Social & Website*
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

*Robert Greene*
Website: https://powerseductionandwar.com 
Books: https://amzn.to/3UnT3L6
Blog: https://powerseductionandwar.com/blog 
Facebook: https://Facebook.com/48LawsofPowerbook
X: https://twitter.com/RobertGreene 
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/robertgreeneofficial 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@robertgreene 
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/@RobertGreeneOfficial

*Timestamps*
00:00:00 Robert Greene
00:01:58 Sponsors: ROKA, Helix Sleep & Waking Up 
00:05:56 Mastery (The Book), Purpose
00:08:26 Finding Purpose, Childhood, Learning & Emotional Engagement
00:18:00 Early Interests, Delight & Discovery
00:22:50 Love vs. Hate Experiences & Learning
00:28:25 Self-Awareness, Frustration, Excitation
00:31:47 Sponsor: AG1
00:33:18 Sublime Experiences, Real vs. False; Authenticity & Time
00:43:57 Power & Relationships; Purpose & Mastery
00:55:51 Seduction, Vulnerability, Childhood
01:07:04 Sponsor: InsideTracker
01:08:05 Power Dynamics & Romance; Equality, Love Sublime & Connection
01:18:42 Vulnerability in Relationships, Creativity; Social Media, Justice
01:29:45 Outrage, Control, “Art of Ignore”
01:33:50 Masculinity & Femininity
01:42:16 Picking Role Models; Purpose & Mentor Relationship
01:51:07 “Alive” Thinking; Anxiety & Creativity 
01:58:55 Convergent Interests & Romantic Relationships
02:07:19 Self-Awareness, Core Values & Romantic Relationships
02:15:27 Non-Verbal Communication & Relationships
02:24:58 Eyes, Voice, Intuition & Seduction
02:28:38 Virtual World, Social Skills, Non-Verbal Communication
02:32:19 Self-Awareness & Intelligence, Artificial Intelligence (AI), Nuance
02:41:43 Human Brain, Plasticity
02:45:18 Stroke & Near-Death Experiences, Self, Time
02:55:49 Appreciation & Near-Death Experience, Urgency
03:01:36 “Death Ground” & Urgency
03:09:13 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, YouTube Feedback, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

#HubermanLab #RobertGreene

Disclaimer: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine my guest today is Robert Green Robert Green is an author who has written more than five bestselling books including the 48 Laws of Power the laws of human nature and Mastery he did his bachelor's training at the University of California Berkeley and the University of Wisconsin at Madison Robert Green's books are both unique and important for several reasons not the least of which is that they explore the interaction between the psychology of self self-exploration and the psychology of human interaction all rooted in history and modern culture and at the same time in a way that pertains to everybody I first learned about Robert's work from reading the book Mastery which to my mind is a brilliant exploration and a practical tool for how to think about and pursue one's purpose purp whenever I'm asked for book suggestions I always include Mastery in my top three recommendations during today's discussion we cover a wide range of topics including how to find and pursue and Achieve one's purpose we talk about the selection of a life partner as well as romantic and other types of relationships we also discussed the topics of motivation and urgency and this concept of death ground which arose during our discussion of Robert's recent stroke Robert stroke rendered him certain limitations but also has allowed him to explore how to write how to exercise indeed how to interface with life in general in new ways that allow him to continue to expand his sense of purpose I'm certain that by the end of today's episode you will have gleaned tremendous amounts of new knowledge that will allow you to navigate forward along the path to your purpose perhaps find your purpose if you feel you haven't done that yet as well as to greatly enhance your relationship with yourself with others and indeed to the world around you before we begin I'd like to emphas ize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is Roa Roa makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality I've spent a lifetime working on the biology the visual system I can tell you that your visual system has to contend with an enormous number of challenges in order for you to be able to see clearly Roa understands those challenges and has designed their eyeglasses and sunglasses accordingly so that you always see with Crystal Clarity Roa eyeglasses and sunglasses are designed with a new technology called float fit which allows them to fit perfectly and not move around even when you're active in fact whenever I'm wearing my Roa eyeglasses or sunglasses I usually forget that I'm wearing them I happen to wear Roa eyeglasses at night when I drive or if I'm reading at night and I wear Roa sunglasses during the daytime if it's very bright especially if I'm driving into sunlight if you'd like to try Roa eyeglasses or sunglasses you can go to roka.com that's r.com and enter the code huberman for 20% off your first order again that's r.com and enter the code huberman at checkout today's episode is also brought To Us by Helix sleep Helix sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are tailored to your unique sleep needs now sleep is the foundation of mental health physical health and performance when we are sleeping well and enough mental health physical health and performance all stand to be at their best one of the key things to getting a great night's sleep is to make sure that your mattress is tailored to your unique sleep needs Helix sleep has a brief two-minute quiz that if you go to their website you take that quiz and answer questions such as do you tend to sleep on your back your side or your stomach do you tend to run hot or cold in the middle of the night maybe you don't know the answers to those questions and that's fine at the end of that two-minute quiz they will match you to a mattress that's ideal for your sleep needs I sleep on the dusk DUS us mattress and when I started sleeping on a dusk mattress about two years ago my sleep immediately improved so if you're interested in upgrading your mattress go to helixsleep.com huberman take their two-minute sleep quiz and they'll match you to a customized mattress for you and you'll get up to $350 off any mattress order and two free pillows again if interested go to Helix sleep.com huberman for up to $350 off and two free pillows today's episode is also brought To Us by waking up waking up is a meditation app that includes hundreds of meditation programs mindfulness trainings yoga NRA sessions and nsdr non-sleep deep rest protocols I started using the waking up app a few years ago because even though I've been doing regular meditation since my teens and I started doing Yoga Nidra about a decade ago my dad mentioned to me that he had found an app turned out to be the waking up app which could teach you meditations of different durations and that had a lot of different types of meditations to place the brain and body into different states and that he liked it very much so I gave the waking up app a try and I too found it to be extremely useful because sometimes I only have a few minutes to meditate other times I have longer to meditate and indeed I love the fact that I can explore different types of meditation to bring about different levels of understanding about Consciousness but also to place my brain and body into lots of different kinds of States depending on which meditation I do I also love that the waking up app has lots of different types of Yoga Nidra sessions for those of you who don't know Yoga Nidra is a process of lying very still but keeping an active mind it's very different than most meditations and there's excellent scientific data to show that yoganidra and something similar to it called non-sleep deep rest or nsdr can greatly restore levels of cognitive and physical energy even with just a short 10-minute session if you'd like to try the waking up app you can go to waking up.com huberman and access a free 30-day trial again that's waking up.com huberman to access a free 30-day trial and now for my discussion with Robert Green Robert I'm so happy you're here I'm reallyy happy to be here Andrew thank you so much for inviting me a short story in 2015 I was teaching a course to undergraduates this was a big course 450 students where was this this was when I was a professor at University of California San Diego I was about to move back to Stanford um but the course was entitled neural circuits in health and disease but there was a final lecture where I would do a lot of Q&A with the students about science about careers about career paths and what I found was that many of the students had questions about not just science but about how to learn and forage for information yeah and I recommended three books at the end of the course every year that I taught it I taught it for four years and one of the books was the book longitude which is a wonderful story about discovery of timekeeping devices at c um one book I'll leave as a mystery um not to be not to be mysterious but because it's not it's it's a science book I'll just tell you what it is it's um uh principles of Neuroscience so I thought that I don't know that one yeah it's a big it makes a better a door stop uh for most than than a book but it's it's a wonderful resource um if you want to learn about neuroscience and your book Mastery W and the reason I recommended Mastery is because these students were soon going to go into the great Jungle of yeah you know post uh undergraduate education and and for me I found Mastery to be an absolutely transformative book in that it taught me so much about how to learn from others how to expect certain types of um interactions when one kind of assigns themselves to a mentor um and vice versa and it talked about some things that we'll get into in more depth today but not the least of which is about identifying that um unique seed that exists within all of us that can guide our best decisions in terms of finding our purpose and it and so I will usually end with a great debt of gratitude and I'll probably do that again at the end but I want to start with a great debt of gratitude uh Mastery transformed my entire life and and in many ways this podcast probably wouldn't exist were it not for Mastery because um it really embedded in me this idea that we all have uh a deeper purpose and it explains how to go about finding that purpose so I tell you that and I also will use that as a segue for um asking you now since I'm sure people's ears are picked up to this you know how do you find your purpose um could you share with us what what it is to find one's purpose and how early life events perhaps can cue us to what that purpose is for each of us well thank you for that that marvelous introduction I'm almost blushing that's that's fantastic story um well you know being a human being is not easy as opposed to an animal because we're born and nobody gives us like a direction our parents might be a little bit our college teachers Etc mentors but generally we're on our own and it's a very very difficult process you wake up in the morning and you don't really know what you're what you can do you could choose 12 different paths it can be very confusing and very overwhelming when you find that sense of purpose when you find what I call your life's task everything has a direction everything has a purpose your energy is concentrated it's it's not like you're just going down a single narrow pathway it's not like life becomes boring and it's just about discipline and solving problems it's actually the most exciting thing that can ever happen to you because you never have that lost feeling you wake up in the morning you go yeah this is what I need to accomplish people come at you with all kinds of distractions and boring and irritating things you're able to cut it out it's just the most marvelous piece of internal radar that you can have so I genuinely wish that everybody can find that kind of internal radar and so it's not easy and I understand that there's no like instant formula because we're all about instant formulas it's difficult and I want you to know that so it's not like Robert can give me the answer in three minutes no I can't but there's a process involved it's not it's not you know a mystery you can follow a very singular process and the idea is you're talking about childhood the way I like to frame it is when you were were born you are a phenomenon you are unique your DNA has never occurred in the history of the universe going back billions of years it will never occur in the future your life experience with your parents and everything that you experienc in your early years going on up is unique it's yours you're are one of a kind right so that is your source of power to waste that is just the worst thing you can do in your life and what what the power is is find finding that uniqueness what makes you you and how you can M that and how you can go deep into it and use that to create a career path right and so I tell people when you're a child when you're four or five or even younger you have what the great psychologist maslo called impulse voices there Little voices in your head that say I love this I hate that I like this food I don't like when Mommy moves this way I like when Daddy comes from here here you're very queued into who you are and what you like and what you don't like and these voices kind of direct you in certain ways right and when you're very young they direct you towards intellectual mental Pursuits as well and there's a book I recommend for everybody uh it's Howard Gardner's five frames of mind it's helped me immensely the idea is he talks about five forms of intelligence our problem is we think of intelligence as mostly intellectual but there are many forms of intelligence there's the intelligence that has to do with words there's abstract intelligence that has to do with patterns and Mathematics there's kinetic intelligence it has to do with the body there's social intelligence he has five of them and the idea is your brain naturally veers towards one of them it can Veer towards two of them that happens but generally one of them kind of dominates right and it's like a grain in your brain that's going in a certain direction you want to go with that grain and because that's where your power will lie so when you're young if you go back and think about when you were four or five you you can maybe get a picture of some kind of direction or voice inside of you that was impelling you towards this I know for me it was words from I can remember when I was six years old I was just obsessed with words just the letters in Words almost like in almost slightly schizophrenic way I would spell words backwards I would take them apart I would do anagrams I love paland drums right so I had a thing about words and language it's very Primal some people you know Albert Einstein when he was four years old his father gave him a birthday gift of a compass and he was just mesmerized by this Compass the idea that there are invisible forces out there in the cosmos moving this needle and he's obsessed with the idea of invisible forces Steve Jobs when he was like seven or eight or maybe younger in Berling game California his father they passed by a store with de technological devices in the window and he was just hypnotized by the design of those devices and the glass tubes and everything so he wanted to go in that direction you know Tiger Woods saw his father hitting golf balls in the garage and he was just like screaming with joy he had to he had to do that right you know I can give you a million different examples of this of course these are people who are famous obviously we can go back and find that it's easier but what happens to you and please cut me off if I'm going on too long no please continue please what happens to you is you're seven now you're getting older and you're starting to not hear that voice anymore you're hearing the voice of your teachers telling you you're not good at this field you need to get better at math you know you shouldn't be interested in these sports or anything you should be going this dire your parents are starting to tell you this is the career they want for or the direction they want you to go in right you start hearing that more than your own voice and as you get older it gets worse and worse and worse then when you're a teenager it's all about what other people are doing your peers what's cool what's not cool you know and that kind of is more so all of these noise enters your brain and you can't hear that anymore you don't know who you are and so you go to college you kind of maybe choose a a major that seems practical that your parents want you to go in into maybe you kind of wander around you're not sure and then you enter the work world without that inner radar that I'm talking about and you brother you're lost right where should I go well I need to make money right and so you make a choice based on the need to make a lot of money some not everyone but some people do that and I understand that need we all need to make a living but that can set you off on a very bad path because you're not connected emotionally the thing is when you figure out that Primal inclination that grain that's inside of you then you have the the energy to to do to be disciplined to go through boring tasks to learn you learn at a faster rate because you're emotionally engaged when you're emotionally engaged in a subject the brain learns twice three times four times as fast as when you're not I always give the example in college I studied foreign languages which was kind of a passion of mine for three or four years I studied French and then I went to Paris and I couldn't speak a word it was it was useless because it didn't teach me anything practical right I was totally confused and then but I was in Paris and I and I loved it and I wanted to live there right and I had a girlfriend and I needed to speak French to her and I can tell you in one month I learned more than those four years of University because I wanted to because I was engaged my emotions were there it was like I had to survive survive to learn French whereas so most of us we don't have a need really to learn this subject We're Half we're paying half attention but when you find that thing that really connects to you you're paying deep attention your emotions are engaged you're learning at a much faster rate okay and so the thing is how do you find that when you're older when you're 21 I I I give people a lot of help and it's usually not so difficult we can go through that process it gets harder when you're 30 and you've been wandering around but it's not impossible I didn't really start find my exact path until I was 38 39 to be honest so there's hope when you get 40 and you get 50 gets more and more difficult right and it's very sad if you wasted that seed of uniqueness that I'm talking about and I tell people there are ways of going back and we go through a process like archaeology we have to dig and dig and dig and find those bones from your childhood that indicated what you were meant to do but when you find your life's task everything opens up it doesn't mean you figured out okay I've got to aim for this particular job when I'm 28 that's not how it works it gives you a sense of direction you can try different things you can experiment you can have fun when you're in your 20s you're going to learn you're going to learn skills but it gives you an overall framework instead of whoa all this confusion this chaos social media the internet I could go here here here you're lost at C it gives you a very important sense of direction a compass as you described this I I have this image of um you know you mentioned animals um that presumably don't have a lot of flexibility in terms of the niches they can exist in but the way I imagine this process is that as a human we're plopped into a environment and here I'm using analogy where um we don't really know if we are an aquatic animal a terrestrial animal or a or an Aven right or an amphibian or an amphibian for that matter um and to make the wrong choice right to be an amphibian who's trying to fly although I'm sure they're out there um in the animal kingdom uh it it's not just a waste of time it's probably deadly um and not to overd dramatize the the failure of finding one's purpose but I see it that way whereas um perhaps we could just say that the process of finding one's purpose is to to realize like ah you know um I'm an amphibian I can go in and out of water whereas a bunch of other creatures around me stop at the water's edge right right and this is really cool and a bunch of these other things like these flying things that they can't actually even go in the water some of them might you know be on the surface or dive into it but they they can't do what I can do so the process of self-discovery it sounds like it's about um restricting one's choices to a a a sort of wedge within the full landscape of of options and um you know for me I can certainly recall after reading Mastery it helped me recall some early seed emotions that I experienced as a very distinct sensation in my body can you describe that yeah um without making it too um specific to my my unique taste you know as a kid I loved um flora and fauna I loved learning about biology sure yeah no surprise there um but animals and how they move in particular and fish and going to a a proper aquarium store for the first time for me and going snorkeling for the first time was like Wow and even as I describe it it's almost like my body fls I feel it in my left arm of all things and it feels like there's something to do about it it's not just that I'm in observation of things that Delight me right it's like there's something there's an activation State created within me like I got to do something with this and typically it's tell everybody about it until they won't listen anymore um but oftentimes it's to also draw those things to think about them and I just Delight in them it's a constant source of delight and so seeds such as those and there are a few other things in that in that landscape of Flora and Fauna and learning about animals and biology including the human animal and then organizing information feels so satisfying to me it's like a drug that um and so it just felt feels like this you know Eternal spring of of life right and so for me that's what it was and to and in 2015 when I was teaching that course the course I loved but I was feeling a little bit astray in my scientific career and then I read Mastery and I realized yes I love running a laboratory I love teaching but there's something else for me and it has to do not with a podcast I didn't even know what a podcast I probably I knew what a podcast was I was listening to podcast at that time but um but I wasn't on social media I had no thoughts of having a podcast but what I wanted was that feeling in its total number of forms that's the goal get that feeling in as many forms as possible right is that is that about that's a that's that's absolutely perfect because the connection to what I'm talking about it's not an intellectual thing it's it's visceral it's emotional it's physical right and you feel it in your body and when you're doing it it's like it's at your level it's like you're swimming with the current you feel it things are easy everything clicks together there's a delight not everything is going to be delightful there's going to be tedium involved there's going to be moments of boredom but you're able to withstand the moments of boredom because you feel the Deep overall connection so yes that's precisely what I'm talking about I mean it's for me it's a little bit similar thing is I said about words but the other thing that I was obsessed with when I was a kid was early human ancestors don't ask me why I just was so obsessed with our ancestors millions of years ago and how it's possible to be living here in the 60s or 70s with cars and everything but to come to where we are now and I wrote a a short story when I was eight years old about a vulture It Was Written from the point of view of a vulture watching the first humans kind of emerge on the planet I'm sure it was absolutely awful Dreadful but the weird thing is I'm writing a new book and all I'm doing in that book is going into ear into early humans and I feel like a kid again I'm so excited I'm so happy so I can very much relate to your story you mentioned these five different forms of intelligence or frame frames of Mind as you refer to them um and I'm certainly aware that you know I lean towards a more intellectual interests although as you pointed out the the excitement the Delight is visceral yeah and the actions are actions they're of the body ultimately right um one has to draw speak write books Etc um to to transmute that excitement into something real for people that are not as intellectually tuned but maybe are kinesthetically tuned for instance um I can only wonder what that's like uh I'm not completely uncoordinated but I don't think I have a kinesthetic Attunement uh or frame of mind but I for instance um had a podcast listener mention that they think in feels that they literally experience thought as a Ser as sort of a patchwork of bodily Sensations right and that thought for them is not of the stuff from the neck up but only from the neck down which to me was really intriguing and so I only raise this because um there have to be a as you point out there's an infinite number of different sort of um orientations based on our unique DNA and experience but what do you think explains why these particular seeds or uh as you point out like the the the direction that the grain runs in the brain I mean it's it's partially going to be nature it's going to be DNA um but we we're talking about this as if there's some exciting or a inspiring or delightful thing that captures us can it be the other way too can it be um you know one has a bad experience as a child in an intellectual environment and then decides you know I'm I'm going in the D things of the body feel good things of the mind of intellect feels bad and does it matter whether or not we are drawn to our Purpose By recognizing what we love or what we hate um or are both useful oh they're both very very useful um you know a lot of intelligence is is not is non-verbal we think in terms of images we're we're very much infected by the emotions of other people so I know for instance uh my mother is very very interested in history she's obsessed with history and I probably absorbed her interest in history I don't think there's a genetic a gene for that interest you know so you're you're going to absorb things from your parents as well so it's not all just genetic but yeah what you hate will pay a big will have a big thing but the problem with doing that is if you go into a direction in you're in you're in elementary school Etc and they force you to learn math and you hate it what it tends to do is it turns you off from learning in general you think I don't want to I don't want to I don't want to be disciplined I don't want to go through anything because it's painful doesn't lead anywhere it's not me frustration it turns you off from learning in general so it's really really important for a child to have the love experience as early as possible so that they can know what they hate and why they hate it right and then they can Rebel and they can go into that field as opposed to I hate learning I hate discipline I hate studying I hate trying things over and over again if you're kinesthetically oriented and you know a part of me I understand that because I love sports is you have to you have to practice it's going to take a lot of it's not you're not going to instantly be good at something right and that's going to require a love of it right but if your math experience I hate learning you're not you're it's going to transfer to sports you're going to hate discipline in general so it's very important for parents to let that child have at least glimmers of that love moment I know for me when I um finished college and I entered the work world I had to get a job I got worked in journalism I hated it I hated working for other people I hated hated office politics I hated all the egos I hated the smarminess I hated the lack of quality it was all just about you know making money and getting things out there and then I worked in Hollywood I hated Hollywood I hated working in Hollywood that formed me very much maybe go in the direction that I went in but only from the basis of I knew that I wanted to be a writer so you know that's very important that it's not just hate it can form you but there also has to be that posit of deep emotional love of something that also is grounded in you in some way what you just said really highlights the fact that energy and motivation can come from either either pressure you know desire for something or desire to get away from something and um earlier when you were talking about um how we are so much more engaged and driven toward things that stir us emotionally and and actually we know based on the neuroscience you know too I'm sure that um only by the release of certain neurochemicals in the brain and body would our brain have any reason to change right if you don't feel agitation and you can do everything that you're trying to do of course your brain wouldn't change like why would it right that agitation is a is a signature of the neurochemicals that are saying hey something's different now right right you might need to do something different including rewire yourself right um and that can come from positive or negative experiences I'm obsessed with this idea of energy I mean we all want to have more energy and focus and normally we hear about the concept of energy in the context of caloric energy like what should we eat and when and how much and we need to get sleep but what you're really referring to is neural energy like the the engagement of ourselves that's you know uh sitting there ready to be engaged but it requires the right experiential macronutrients right the experiential micronutrients as opposed to of course we need good nutrition but that's not sufficient it's necessary but not sufficient so uh would you say that when um we are let let's say since a good number of our listeners are in adulthood um you know from our 20s on that the things that excite us as adults that really generate some feeling of Readiness or or grab our attention um are still informative toward guiding our decisions about best life and life purpose well um what do you what exactly do you mean by that I mean like because there are things that excite you in in a kind of a quick way like you know where you have to relieve some tension and you there's entertainment and there's things that kind of give you pretty immediate gratification and there's the larger P picture of something that will give you fulfillment over years to come so you can feel that when you're older and you can pay attention to it but a lot of the time is we we're paying too much attention to the immediate pleasures of life to what gives us instant gratification and that's what we're grabbing for so this is a much more kind of deeper process that involves that digging that I was saying it it's it's deeper than just kind of I like this I don't like that you know kind of thing it's it's more it's more something macro than than just just that and so when you're in your 20s or in your 30s or your 40s you want to be paying attention to yourself and the problem with people in the world today is you're not paying attention to yourself not inside your own head you don't hear those voices you don't hear what you love what you like anymore because as I said there's so many of these other distractions going on and so you're always like attuned to what other people like right because you're in social media this is what people are following this is what they're interested in as opposed to disengaging backing off from that and and looking at yourself and going through the process of that's not me actually I don't really like that you know and so what you're talking about is I think very profound is levels of frustration or anxiety are definite signals that you must pay attention to that they're telling you this isn't a good direction for you this is a waste of time for you and in general I tell people selfawareness being able to hear those voices to understand that your frustration is telling you something and sometimes you you just act on it without understanding it but understanding why why you're frustrated why you don't like your career why you're not happy about where you're going is the key to everything it will open up it will actually be able even in your 30s to return you to that childhood inclination but if you can't listen to where those emotions come from then they're useless they're not teaching you anything as we all know quality nutrition influences of course our physical health but also our mental health and our cognitive functioning our memory our ability to learn new things and to focus and we know that one of the most important features of highquality nutrition is making sure that we get enough vitamins and minerals from high quality unprocessed or minimally processed sources as well as enough probiotics and prebiotics and fiber to support basically all the cellular functions in our body including the gut microbiome now I like most everybody try to get optimal nutrition from Whole Foods ideally mostly from minimally processed or nonprocessed Foods however one of the challenges that I and so many other people face is getting enough servings of high quality fruits and vegetables per day as well as fiber and probiotics that often accompany those fruits and vegetables that's why way back in 2012 long before I ever had a podcast I started drinking ag1 and so I'm delighted that ag1 is sponsoring the huberman Lab podcast the reason I started taking ag1 and the reason I still drink ag1 once or twice a day is that it provides all of my foundational nutritional needs that is it provides insurance that I get the proper amounts of those vitamins minerals probiotics and F fiber to ensure optimal mental health physical health and performance if you'd like to try ag1 you can go to drink a1.com huberman to claim a special offer they're giving away five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 again that's drink a1.com huberman to claim that special offer so it sounds like one of the goals is to engage in what I'll just call for the moment unadulterated self-referencing you know unadulterated uh in the the all senses of the word because um as a child as you point out um at stages of life that are before puberty they're literally prex um which I think is important right because um puberty to me as a neurobiologist who started off as a developmental neurobiologist I can tell you that puberty is the most profound transformation that the brain undergoes for in the entire lifespan there's just absolutely no question about it everything is different after puberty because of all of the new relational dynamics that become apparent and our potential involvement in them yeah it's just it's you know it's not talked about enough how dramatically puberty changes the brain sure I mean we are different people before and after puberty hormones that are suddenly raging the hormones are there and it's not just changes in how we view the world but changes in how the World Views us and not just through the lens of sexuality but also expectation of what we are capable of what we are responsible for or not responsible for our learning capacity I mean puberty is like this you know it's also the most rapid stage of Aging in our entire lifespan those kids that go home for summer and then come back like shaving you know I was sort of a late I wasn't a late bloomer but I had a long protracted puberty but I remember those kids I'm sure we we all remember those kids um everything changes and so I think prior to puberty these seeds as you've described them of of delight or of resistance to things think they are unadulterated they're not contaminated by the voices and expectations of others and so I can see the challenge of reaching back to those as an adult um I wonder if this relates to um something that I've heard you talk about before although perhaps not as much as some of the other topics you've discussed publicly which is um the real versus the false Sublime oh um could you perhaps just Define for us what Sublime really is what a Sublime experience is and and the distinction between real and false Sublime experiences because I I feel like this relates to finding that seed right it's it's about finding authentic seeds of within us as opposed to when emotions can be distracting and misleading wow I never thought I never made that connection and it's the book that I'm writing right now so thank you for that I have to think about that I'm actually I'm writing a book on the sublime and um I have several ways of kind of illustrating I generally like to use a metaphor and the metaphor is that being a human being being a social human being living in a particular culture means that you live inside of a circle and that Circle of that time are the conventions of thinking of ideas that are acceptable of behavior that is acceptable this is where you where you can go mentally where you can go physically you know all the codes and conventions so that's Circle for ancient Egypt and for 21st century America they're obviously very different but it's the same Circle it's the same limiting factor you're not supposed to go outside of it these are thoughts experiences Behavior you're not supposed to do the sublime is what lies just outside that Circle um the word sublime comes from on the threshold of it's like here's a door and the sublime is literally at the threshold of the door you're looking out into something else right and the quintessential Sublime experience is a near-death experience you're standing on the on the doorway the threshold of death itself right and so in my book I'm illustrating the different kinds of sublime experiences that you can have in relation to the cosmos in relation to thinking about being alive just being alive is the strangest sensation you can possibly have I have I know that very personally after my stroke I go into childhood chapter on childhood and how Sublime your own childhood was I go into animals relation to animals I go have a chapter about the brain chapter about love I'm working right now on a chapter about history okay but what I'm trying to say is the human brain is wired for these experiences is wired for transcendental experiences that take us out of the narrow little realm that we live in because we're aware of our death as the only animal truly conscious of it own mortality and it frightens the hell out of us and the idea that we can see something larger than than just the the the banal parts of our life is a doorway that open allows us to kind of transcend the moment to feel connected to something larger to feel connected to some power in the cosmos to Evolution itself right and so we're wired for that and I'm writing a chapter now about 40,000 years ago at the moment where I think the sublime was born is a story that I'm trying to illustrate right now with our upper Paleolithic ancestors so it's deep inside of us we need it we have to have it in the 21st century we have very few avenues for it any real Avenues religion used to be the main kind of way of of accessing this and so because it's so deep we reach for false forms of the sublime that give us the sense that we're we're transcending but it's not at all because Sublime has to come from within it's an experience that you have that you're generating in your own mind in your own experience the false Sublime comes from outside it comes from drugs it comes from alcohol it comes from shopping it comes from online rage it comes from joining a cause and just getting out all your aggression and violence right it comes from causes it comes from addictions okay it gives you a sense it calms you down and makes you feel like there's something else going on in life besides your job that you're you're sick of but it's not real it's not lasting it's false it's an illusion it's not based on anything real it's not connecting to that deep part of human nature that's wired for these experiences so what happens is you have to have more and more and more and more of it you have to have you know more of this rush you need more of the drug you need more of the alcohol you need more of the sex you need more of the porn it's never going to satisfy you but the real Sublime you don't have that feeling it's like it's transformative once you feel it it lasts for you for the rest of your life it's what maslo again called a peak experience so that's the difference between the false and the real Sublime I haven't quite connected it to what you were saying but if I think about it I think you're on something very interesting I mean maybe the connection I was trying to draw was uh doesn't hold but yeah for me um those early experiences of seeing things that just delighted me in a way that felt like that not only is well the the the thought process was a long time ago when something like oh my goodness I can't believe this exists this is so cool this is the coolest thing and so clearly create an activation state within me but then there was also a thought and a feeling of again a lot of this is sort of pre preverb it's not truly preverbal I could speak at that age but it was um that's of me and I'm of it right there's a connection there and then it was there's something to do about this the activation State created in the body was you know I I need to learn more about this I need to tell people about this I need to think about this I need more examples of this and see whether or not they're all like this you know etc etc um so certainly it meets some of the criteria of a Sublime experience definitely and I knew again when I was in graduate school and again when I was this young Professor about to transition to tenure that I knew it was going going to do something different it was as if I was on the threshold of something but I didn't know what that next thing was but I could trust it because of that early experience of knowing that's the threat like like I'm an amphibian this is my environment and you're an amphibian too right and we're different amphibians but you know we're going to be amphibians together right and then and there's a permanence to it that it does seem to transcend time I'm obsessed with time perception so I have to be careful not to go off on a tangent about that but the human brain's ability to F slice or macro slice time is incredible and and it's been set of um not just addictions but also interactions with toxic people that they murder time that that humans have a I think it was young I I'll look it up but um one of the great psychologists said something to the extent that um addictive behaviors thought patterns substances are humans attempts to murder time so that they don't have to address their mortality yeah and that's always made a lot of sense to me yeah we say kill time is our expression kill time through passive engagement but also kill time through um trying to get overwhelmed or overtaken by an experience or a substance as opposed to when you're truly connected you have that sense of flow and 3 hours can pass by and you're not even aware Ware of it so time is a totally subjective experience it can be extremely slow and tedious and you feel very depressed or it can pass by but that passes by without you even noticing it and it's a wondrous experience you know when I'm deep in my writing I'm not aware of the time passing I'm so involved I'm so immersed it's a deeply deeply pleasurable experience of time it is Sublime and yeah so I agree with you I think your distinction is very interesting you I'm eager awaiting your your next book but we won't rush you well I I I'm I'm so immersed in it that I could I could talk for hours because I also have a chapter in there about what I call the dayon which is like that voice inside of you that speaks to you and I'm writing a whole chapter about how Sublime that is when you connect to that voice so you are spoton there is something very much connected to master in this book but it's the next chapter that I'm writing fantastic I can't wait I can't wait I'd like to shift slightly to a topic that you've written extensively about which is power um and not just power but also seduction which you've written extensively about and of course you've written about finding one's purpose so tell me if the framework that I've just given myself Liberty to create is an accurate one and if it's not I I'm hoping that um it's not in perhaps some interesting ways so to me you talk about and we will talk about power as as a resource it's it's something that um it's there as a resource it could be used or not used um and I think of Seduction as one form of exchange between an individuals so there's a verb associated with seduction power I'm thinking of more as a noun in this context you're the word guy um and then you know purpose is uh is really about finding like to what end or ends one is going to um devote power seduction and the other forces that allow human beings to interact with each other in the world um but power as a resource that can be expressed in different ways and accessed in different ways maybe we could just explore that a little bit because you know when we hear the word power I think a lot of people kind of brace themselves like here we go someone's going to try and have power over me this is about manipulation and so on and so forth but I learned pretty early on that every every career Endeavor there there are power dynamics there's Mentor mentee they teachers and their students and both have power um in inter in romantic relationship there's a power exchange there are yeses and their NOS there are Mayes there are um uh covert and overt contracts yeah I'll do this because I want to right you'll do this because you want to great sounds great overt contractor they're also covert contracts well I don't feel safe doing that so what I'll do is I'll take something on through from the interaction that you're not aware of so that I can sort of um ease my sense of danger and make give myself the illusion of feeling safe and all sorts of kind of complicated human dynamics that have to do with us having this forbrain thing that can do all of that gymnastics so maybe we could start very simply by just saying you know how would you define power in terms of its uh functional definition like in in in interpersonal relations and then why do you think power is so essential to all relationships that's really what I'd like to get to why is it so essential why couldn't it be something else well the way I Define Powers I try and take it away from that kind of negative context that most people have and that you that you brought up and I bring it to something very primitive and very Primal the way the human being is wired the feeling that we have no control over our environment and in the earliest period it was literally over our environment and wild animals and nature and and climate Etc but now the sense that you have no control over your career over your children over your parents is deeply deeply am miserating and it compels us to act in certain ways either attempts to find positive ways of power or doing what you call covert ways of getting power you know passive aggressive traditionally passive aggressive means so it's deeply wired in us to want a degree of control over the immediate environment and immediate events we can never have complete control and the idea of having complete control is nonsense and it would actually be very ugly because you want a degree of Letting Go and letting circumstances come to you etc etc so the sense of you you you want to feel like with other people and relationships that you can influence them that you can move them in a certain direction either to get you to love you and treat treat you better or either to stop annoying irritating behaviors or either to you know wake up and and find and and and do productive activity if it's your children Etc you want to have the ability to influence people to move them in a certain direction either in your interest or in their interest right and once you have that need and every single human being ever who's ever lived has that need and we often don't recognize it because we're in embarrassed by it we're embarrassed by our desire for power for our need to control every human being has it right and it's not easy because human beings are complicated they don't if you say do this and you're talking to your son he'll do the opposite or he'll do something else you can't just force people in a direction right by being overt and telling them this is what you need to do you create resentment you create an enemy they may they may say yes yes daddy yes husband I'll do what you say say but they're you they're they're going to resist you deep down inside right so people are tricky they wear masks they pretend to say one thing and they do another they have their egos and you inadvertently wound their egos or trip them in some way and they react in a way that you don't expect and so power is this kind of invisible realm that envelops Society where people are continually battling each other and struggling in it but no one is like talking about it no one's being overt about it no one's saying this is exactly what I'm trying to do and so when you enter the social world and the career world you're not expecting these battles you don't know no one's taught you no one's trained you your parents don't train you nobody trains you and you make mistakes and you realize how political people are if you're a Sharky character and there's a certain percentage of them you realize wow I can deceive people I can manipulate them I can get what I want I can pretend to love them and they they'll fall for me and I can do all this other stuff but for most of us the 95% of us who aren't sharks and I'm I'm including myself in that category it's it's it's very very disturbing to suddenly enter that world and see all of that invisible power games on that's no one's given you any advice for helped you and so take it out of the realm of it's just about trying to dominate the world and manipulate and exploit and and abuse it's something inside of you you have this need and your suppression of it will only make you come out in passive ways and you won't be able to control certain things if you want to move people if you want them to follow your ideas if you want them to be more aligned with your politics or your ideas you have to be subtle you have to learn psychology you have to learn certain aspects of how to almost move people without them realizing against in certain directions which is like The Art of Seduction and if you're not interested in that if you're just going to tell people what you think of what you're going to do that means you're not interested in Practical action you're not interested in results you're just interested in venting your own frustrations or your own anger so learning the subtle little dynamics of power is extremely essential because we're a social animal it doesn't mean that you're going to get dirty that you're going to suddenly go out there and manipulate the hell out of people most of the 48 Laws of Power is about defense but how to defend yourself from the Sharks about there how to defend yourself from making classic mistakes like outshining the master like talking too much like arguing with people instead of demonstrating your ideas on and on and on it's not an ugly thing it actually makes you a better social individual so that's how I I like to frame it it's very interesting I I think as a young guy growing up it was so important to me um to know where I fit in with my friend group um and I didn't think of it so much as a hierarchy um nor when I was in my academic studies did I think of it as a hierarchy even though it was clearly was right um so much as it the goal was to figure out where was my unique slot that I could um do the most good for myself and others you know kind of finding my spot um I don't want to say on a shelf because that gives an image of something vertical but you know in the let's make it lateral a lateral arrangement of different people with different strengths different life purposes trying to figure them out you know where where should I be in order to express that and also feel connected to others and um and in order to do that I did have to I realize now based on your answer I did have to figure out um you know who's trying to have power over who's pretending that they don't want Power but is actually exerting power um you know these sorts of things and there's an incredible piece that comes from knowing that one is in the correct Place both profession interpersonally in relation to oneself but also in the context of one's peer peer group it's kind of yeah this is where I belong because trying to gain power when one is trying to move to a position that isn't right for them or in a way that isn't right for them just seems so energetically costly seems like a waste of a life frankly right right you know trying to gather resources simply to to have them to give the illusion of power but then being afraid of losing them just sounds like a recipe for for misery as you pointed out you know whereas figuring out where am I most powerful in the benevolent sense of the word that that that seems like a good a good Pursuit well it's connecting up to to Mastery again and finding your life's purpose you know I I I knew when I was young that I couldn't exert physical power because I was a skinny little runt and I was I wasn't bullied but people would kind of pick on me etc etc so I veered towards intellectual Pursuits where I could have power and in the end you know you might have been a jock and you might have done well in high school but haha Look at me now I'm not saying that it's a beautiful thing that that's but that's part of human nature the desire to actually you know prove yourself and find that Niche that you that you belong to so you don't have that kind of hum that sense of inferiority which Alfred Adler the psychologist describes very eloquently so a lot of it is kind of compensating when you're a child for things that are your weaknesses and finding what you're so good at that you do have that power and people can't bully you right and you you're you're like now a famous neuroscientist whereas they're like who knows what they're doing kind of thing so power definitely is connected in some way to that inner sense of what you were meant to do and you feel it with the with the ease and the connection that comes from it right so I can honestly say that my dislike of working for other people and office politics and egos I now have a of an existence where I don't have to deal with any of that and I'm so blessed and I wake up every morning and I pray to God thank God I I found this because it's it's the perfect lifestyle for me and you're are can be accurately described as an intellectual be Beast so it's um and which is like a compliment right um we hear the word beast and we think uh you know a Ferocious Beast trying to harm others but I'm happy being a beast yeah you know so I think finding where we can be a beast you know and and for some people that's painting or or yeah gardening or whatever it might be um I think is again ties back to the these issues of or this quest of for Mastery seduction is also a very loaded word right it's even more uglier than power because seduction right seduction kind of drips with uh the idea that somebody is tricking someone else into doing something that they otherwise would not want to do but seduction is both our propensity to do it and to have it done to us is hardwired into our nervous system and has a lot to do with the hypothalamus and a bunch of other areas that I won't Bor us with the nomenclature but um seduction to me implies some sort of exchange I suppose we could seduce ourselves through denial or convincing ourselves that of of something but more often than not when we talk about seduction we're talking about an interaction between two or more people so um what are some of the core principles of Seduction and and if you care to play um Anthropologist a bit um and a neuroscientist I I would invite that why do you think we have neural circuits in our brain that allow us to seduce and be seduced well um I don't know how if if I'm if I'm being kind of an armchair intellectual here but my my theory is some of it has to go back to social um events long in our prehistory which have to do with taboos and Society was initially kind of organized by a series of tabos right most notably the taboo on incest and what happened this is just not my theory it's the theory of the malanowski malanowski is I pronounce it um that the moment a taboo enters the human brain like you're not supposed to sleep with this woman the desire arises inside of you to actually sleep with that woman the the the sense of no the sense that this is prohibited stirs the desire stirs the contrary impulses in humans and we can be very um what's the word perverse creatures right so if you've ever tried to suppress a thought you realize that it keeps coming up keeps coming up you can't suppress it don't think of an elephant Andrew whatever you do don't think of an elephant you're thinking of it because you can't help it right the idea that you're not supposed to desire this person stirs that actual desire so I believe the sense of something being taboo and transgressive is the ultimate kind of origin of our desire for seduction but seduction in involves vulnerability it involves somebody gets inside somebody gets under our skin right and to do that we have to let them in so the person being seduced is in some ways to a degree complicit because if you just put up a wall and you said no I I'm not going to be seduced nothing will happen but you have a vulnerability you're letting that person into your psyche Into Your Inner Space the Paradigm for that Early Childhood so Freud talks a lot about this I don't know if people still believe in Freud anymore but I certainly do okay absolutely a genius of both Psychology and Physiology wrong about a lot of things did a lot of things he shouldn't have done I let's acknowledge that I think everyone would agree that sleeping with your patients and being a cocaine addict bad ideas but at the same time he had an absolute like near Supernatural levels of insight and Brilliance into human nature sleep with patience I believe he did um but if I just if I just threw that on him without him doing it then you know uh forgive me he certainly had emotional attachments to his patients that he shouldn't have had I don't know if he slept with them he very well might have but his idea was that the child is seduced by the parent you're in extremely vulnerable position right your life depends on them and they're seducing you with their energy you're letting them in right and that kind of creates a pattern pattern for the rest of your life and so for instance the feeling of being carried by your father and just being taken around physically is a form of Seduction because you don't know what he's going to do to you you're very excited you want that surprise right and to me it's related to the seduction of a story stories are very seducing to us we don't know where they're taking us we don't know what the next chapter is what's going to happen to this character or not the surprise lowers our resistance and opens our mind up to what's going to happen next is a form of Seduction fairy tales the stories you were reading as a child your interactions with your parents they're deeply deeply ingrained in you you cannot be seduced unless you are vulnerable right and so I like to switch it around and get out of the negative connotations being vulnerable is actually a positive trait I think a lot of people now in the world today because things are so harsh and invasive that people have become too invulnerable they don't want to let anything in right and this now infects their relationships with other people they don't want to be influenced they they want to be strong inside of themselves they're afraid of giving in to the other person of surrendering to their influence but it's actually a delightful feeling to surrender to the power of another person and then reverse that charge and have them surrender to your power so when I'm reading a writer and sometimes uh they completely seduce me like friederick nid is one of my favorite writers I let go of everything I let him enter my brain and I'm completely seduced I let him lead me along but then I encounter writers that I don't like at all I I'll mention one you know probably not a good thing but Steven Pinker I don't like Steven Pinker I find him really annoying okay um but I forc myself to try and find a way to be seduced by him to let him into my brain to see where he's coming from to open myself to the possibility that he could be correct so vulnerability letting people into your mental space is a form of intelligence it's a it's kind of an emotional and an intellectual intelligence and forgive me for interrupting but I think it also implies a level of confidence because empathy or allowing oneself to be vulnerable to the point where you're seduced by something um by definition if you're choosing to do it uh implies that you also have the confidence that you can get back to yourself afterward right that you're not going to get lost in the circumstances you're not going to be hijacked to the point of no return right or in some way that's detrimental to you so it it's um it I'm sounding really nerdy here it's a it's cinear with with confidence in many ways sure like take my mind and take it where you will because I know I can come back at any time right right and the same thing in a physical seduction in a romantic sense right you're opening yourself up to the charm to the energy of the other person but if they start displaying dark energy and you see that they're abusive or something is wrong you have the ability to retreat ah well there it gets tricky because very tricky well because the attachment systems which are also rooted in childhood um oftentimes can overwhelm one's ability to recover oneself like to I mean so I mean how many if I had a dollar for every time someone in that I knew in my life saying like you know I know they're bad for me but I just can't like we just can't seem to disengage like that you hear about that all the time I mean you see court cases about this that are public and you know you just go why didn't they just walk away from one another well because once those attachment systems are locked in it almost becomes in a and here metaphorically speaking like a parent child relationship like you can't suddenly decide your parents weren't your parents simply because you know better now right you are forever stricken with the reality that they were and they had an influence and I think that that attachment system is um is a is a force that tugs pretty hard yeah and um a lot of women have written to me since the Art of Seduction sort of saying that their boyfriend or husband was applying some of these tactics on them and it was very painful and they were kind of a little bit angry at me for for it but then they kind of realized that they it wasn't they didn't learn it really from my book it was already kind of wired in them but that reading about these tactics and these strategies actually helped them to recognize what their husband or boyfriend was doing to them the manipulation and the games that were being played do men write to you and talk about the seductive adornments that women have used to to um bring them into relationship as well or are you typically hearing from women I mostly hear from women complaining about men and and and how they've abused them and how they used I see some of these some of the strategies I I don't deny have a slightly nefarious Edge to them because I didn't want to write a book about Seduction That doesn't have that taboo element because I say seduction involves the taboo and I didn't want to I didn't want to censor myself but female toale seduction clearly also exists less of I acknowledge that it's um less often is it physically abusive um but right I mean from an early age both boys and girls men and women are coached by Society on the sorts of uh seductive tactics and and adornments right I mean everything from makeup perfume hairstyles cars watches jewelry um expression power displays of any kind um I mean that stuff the world's filled with that stuff yeah but men are generally kind of happy when a woman seduces them right they're unless they're after their money or something like that which happens but generally the sense you know I talk about this in in the first chapter about Sirens which I say is the quintessence essential archetype of the female seductress the the kind of half human half bird creature on a rock singing so beautifully that you have to jump in the water and then they kill you and so the idea is that men want to let go because men have to be so in control so powerful they have to project this image they have a secret desire to let go and be almost dominated by a very powerful woman a lot of men have that and I talk about some of the most powerful men in in history jul jius Caesar Mark Anthony um Joe dagio who all these men very masculine men who fallen for very feminine siren-like women and been completely dominated by them and they actually kind of enjoy the process because it's like a sense of I can let go I can enter this totally s sensual physical world and it it's extremely pleasing it's like another realm outside of my kind of cold masculine world you know so I don't really get men complaining too much about women who've seduced them honestly it's usually the other way around I'd like to take a quick break and thank our sponsor insid tracker insid tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals now I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term Health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test a major problem with a lot of blood tests out there however is that you get information back about metabolic factors lipids and hormones and so forth but you don't know what to do with that information with inside tracker they make it very easy because they have a personalized platform that allows you to see the levels of all those things metabolic factors lipids hormones Etc but it gives you specific directives that you can follow that relate to nutrition behavioral modification supplements Etc that can help you bring those numbers into the ranges that are optimal for you if you'd like to try inside TR TR ER you can go to insid tracker.com huberman to get 20% off any of insid tracker's plans again that's insid tracker.com huberman I've heard before um and I promise this is not an original idea that I'm pretending to have heard elsewhere that my friend asked me to ask sort of question that in all sexual exchanges there's a power exchange definitely um maybe you could elaborate on that um because as you were describing some of the seductive power dynamics that exist uh a phrase that I've heard before uh came to mind um that at first made me chuckle but then made me think um quite deeply about this issue of the relationship between sexual and power dynamics which is this notion of topping from the bottom you know if one is giving someone else the impression that they are more powerful by virtue of the word giving they actually hold some power right power is can be given or taken but um often times uh seductive exchanges and sexual exchanges and romantic exchanges in particular are about both people uh buying into a ute a temporary illusion let's pretend that you're in charge when actually I'm in charge okay but I know that you think that you're in charge okay let's just pretend none of that exists and just do X right and I think this is another example of covert contracts and it's one that actually can potentially create a lot of problems post Hawk right um but I think the relationship between sex romance and power is an important area to explore in the context of this well I wrote The Art of Seduction with the idea that it was an art invented by women it was invented by women who had no power essentially socially politically in any sense of the word in in in domestically right and but the one power that they could that they could wield over a man was through sex some physical attraction and so they develop this art of kind of luring a man into their world through various theatrical effects Cleopatra being kind of the archetype of this and then luring the the powerful man into this world he has the illusion that he's the one pursuing her but in fact she is the one controlling the dynamic so often times the person who appears to be the weaker one in the relationship who's not not doing the pursuing is actually inviting the pursuing is actually leading the other person on so there's a lot of kind of appearance games going on and you can never really figure out who exactly is in control of the dynamic because one person is like allowing the other person to lead them on but the fact that you're allowing them is a degree of power is a degree of control right so it's very hard to figure out and sex and power and romantic relationships are very much intertwined in US physically emotionally neurologically you can't avoid it right and so I think it's kind of dishonest to say that that none of that exists that it's like that there's some egalitarian Paradise out of there when it it's really not wired in us for that kind of relationship there's a recent scientific publication SL factoid that I want to share with you in this context because I'd like your thoughts on it uh David Anderson who's a phenomenal neurobiologist he's been a guest on this podcast before he's a professor at Caltech studies um basically the functions of the hypothalamus so okay things like uh aggression mating and and things of that sort um and does it so it in with great detail he's a virtuoso of the hypothalamus and he published a paper two years ago showing that indeed there are neural circuits in the brain of animals and presum presumably in humans as well that control sexual mounting Behavior but that there is actually a separate circuit for purely nonsexual mounting and physical power over that's expressed in animals and anyone that's ever owned a dog and gone to the dog park we'll see same-sex mounting between dogs or mounting between dogs that has apparently um no sexual end point yeah and in exploring this literature and some talking to dve about it it's very clear that there are neural circuits um that have everything to do with essentially one animal of a species getting on top of the other animal usually from behind often times scruffing or biting the back of the neck and saying I control you it's a it's often done in a playful context especially between animals not always aggressive but there's a certain element of aggressive to it but it essentially says I decide whether or not you are mobile or not for this moment and that it and this is very important I want to emphasize this this is a circuit that is entirely separate from all of the reflexes associated with sexual behavior in males and females I find this to be fascinating um and because we hear about power over right and we hear about power and we think about physical power over but the idea that something as primitive as mounting just like something as primitive as biting or as striking has its own unique set of circuits in the brain I think substantiates every everything that you put in uh in your books about power and maybe even seduction as well so as I just kind of toss that out there for consideration I I I wonder um if you have any Reflections on it if not um feel free to just say I don't but of course but to me this was a really important Discovery because I think everyone looks at mounting behavior and says oh that has to be sexual and sometimes it's oh I see what you mean but but it's not that there's a there seem to be a host of neural circuits in the brain that are are really about finding who's on top literally that has nothing to do with sex yeah I'm sure that's true I've never I've never I've never um read anything about that but I can say that um I wrote a chapter in in my new book about love and that's a different thing than than seduction and I was trying to come up with an idea of love that does have an element of equality that doesn't have this power Dynamic going on in it of that and um you know kind of like the antithesis of my Art of Seduction where I'm almost contradicting myself and I was going into the into the biology of it and even into the physics of it so there is a famous uh French biologist whose Name Escapes me I'm sorry I can't remember from the 20s and 30s um and he was studying parium and he found he was studying them you know they there in these ponds Etc and he said that there was these moments where these single celled organisms were suddenly coupling they were all joining together just one to one and they were absorbing the membrane of one inside the other and then they would like go then once one couple did that all the parami started joining up together then they would sink to the bottom of the pond and parium don't reproduce through sex they reproduce through dividing themselves right self- reproduction and so he was saying that the desire to couple to to to connect to someone so deeply where you absorb one is absorbed in the other is biologically wired into US goes back millions and millions and millions of years and it's a desire essentially a biological desire for love right and it's an energy that permeates all all the it's it's not just about power and hierarchies and that he was showing other creatures that had something similar going on and you know in physics we talk about entanglement and we also talk about um you know matter if matter isn't absor isn't um opposed by a lot of ktic energy it joins together I mean particles join together to form matter etc etc so there's something in the universe that's trying to connect things to each other so there's this this kind of energy that exists in the world where we have have a deep need to connect to somebody with outside of those power dynamics right where there's a degree of equality where we're drawn to each other and we let go of the ego games we let go of the playing we kind of surmount our own physiology our own hypothalamus and we engage in this I call it love Sublime and it involves the physical part the sexual part is the trigger for it because when you have sex with someone your body is suddenly permeable to their energy in a way that you cannot control it releases all kinds of of chemicals in the brain that are very powerful and often times that sense is too powerful and you react and and you're afraid of it and you pull back but if you don't react and you go further then the mind also becomes permeable to the other person and their energy and their desire and so then it kind of creates a SP spiring effect where the physical and the mental connection reaches the state that I call love Sublime now it's an ideal it doesn't really exists that much out there in the world today but there are stories in history that illustrate it and I believe that is a biological necessity for us to feel a deep deep sense of connection we normally ascribe that to religion to God Etc but I maintain the essence of love the model for for love is between to human beings straight or homosexual doesn't matter and that feeling of surmounting our own neurology our own system and and entering this zone is deeply deeply satisfying we all want it and it has to involve letting go of the power dynamics letting and everything being equal it's not that the other person is exactly like you you recognize their difference but but as far as being worthy of attention being worthy and respected you leave all that other stuff outside so there is a Zone that's possible that's outside this power dyamic that we're talking about I'm excited that you're writing about this uh so this is for your next book yeah I'm very excited I couldn't help but think of some of the parallels between what you describe and what we're observing nowadays in the landscape of politics and social dynamics where clearly um there is no setting aside of egos people feel both sides feel attacked everyone in between feels confused like why do I have to pick a side um and there seems to be no hint of a future where people are setting down their swords it which means if we were to go with your earlier definition which I like a lot that um nobody feels safe enough to be vulnerable enough to um to allow the union of of people to occur which is just a way a way of rewarding you know a bunch of other things um and not nearly as eloquently as as you described it but if setting aside of power dynamics and making oneself vulnerable is is the key to accessing love in the Romantic context surely but also in the um societal context I mean what are the channels for that I mean I suppose there is the argument not mine that everyone should just take a boatload of psychedelics and see the interconnectedness of things but that seems like an unrealistic route I I just don't see that being you know um you know 12th grade graduation um curriculum um nor do I think it would be healthy I to be clear I think that you we'd end up with a lot of expression of of problems there um but short of a magic substance that could increase feelings of uh connectedness among everyone simultaneously um how are you going to save Humanity Robert well um CU I'm I'm concerned about young people in particular with hookup culture with pornography Etc Etc it's kind of rewiring the human brain and we're losing what I was just describing and I see a particularly a lot of young people and I don't blame them because they've grown up in a world that's very chaotic and very hostile could could I say I think it's um and not to be nitpicky here but I I love what you just said I think in my mind it's hi things like that are hijacking the hardwiring of the brain okay um and I'm just again forgive me my the audience is probably going can't really rewire brain like that well I think we can expand and rewire Upon Our hard wirring but so much of what you you talk about in your books is about finding one's Essence but then also what I love about your book so much among many other things is that it's about that dance between the hard wirring and and the possible of through effort so anyway forgive me for for being it's very accurate um so yeah what how do you get us out of this well you're putting a big burden on me I am but I think you're up to it you know um well I try to do it in this chapter because I wanted to seduce the reader into the idea that this is something extremely pleasurable and extremely healthy and the feeling of being vulnerable is a very positive attribute that will infect not just your romantic relationships but will infect you mentally so creative people are extremely vulnerable they're extremely vulnerable to ideas they're extremely vulnerable to the environment and closing yourself off into your own ego into yourself so the chapter is called Escape the Prison of the ego and you're you're kind of trapped inside of yourself and your own thoughts and your own desires and it's like a prison it's enclosing you and you want to escape somehow and you escape through drugs you escape through porn but it doesn't lead to actually escaping you want to be able to let go of the self and get out of this this prison that you're in right and so it's a desire that that we all have and so I wanted to frame it as this incredibly positive Dynamic that you can engage in and the ability to be vulnerable to other people to open yourself up and to say that yeah they might hurt me but I'm strong enough to take it and if they hurt me I'll learn from it and I'll rebound and I know that's a bit naive on my part but I want you to at least have that feeling because a lot of young people write to me and they say I I can't fall in love anymore I can't don't like that feeling I it makes the loss of control is too much you know and and a lot of that their behavior patterns are in creating this sense of control which you can have when you're locked inside of yourself uh hence over indulgence in pornography yeah and masturbation Etc as a way to avoid the you know the understandable fear about inter relational Dynamics yeah yeah so you know when you're young you're you're idealistic at least a lot of young people are and you have these dreams and these hopes and to let go of this possibility which is deeply pleasurable and deeply therapeutic to the human animal as a social animal it's like the highest form of interaction that we can have so my strategy in that chapter was to paint such a wonderful portrayal of the pleasures that are awaiting You by letting go of your defenses of letting go of all of your natural or resistance factors and opening yourself up to other people is is a key to not just a romantic relationship but to Career Success to mental energy to creativity to being open in general right and so I don't think I could have a a wide you know a huge impact but we'll see when the when the book comes out but I'm advocating that sense of opening yourself up to the universe to the Cosmos itself as an energy that permeates the world and so that you don't want to the feeling of being closed inside of your ego inside of your yourself I want to make it so you feel the pain of that because you don't really feel the pain of it you feel like it's comfortable for you but I want to make it clear to you that it's not comfortable it's deeply deeply painful and it's disconnecting you from some of the best experiences you can have in life so I have that strategy the only other hope I have is in the human Spirit itself so a lot of this is being caused by social media I believe right um and uh and the instant and the the kind of immediate gratification we can get in so many ways and my hope is that young people get fed up and get dis disgusted with all this disconnection and alienation in their life and that they hunger from actually something more communal more interactive more real as opposed to Virtual and so that the human Spirit can't be completely squashed by technology Etc so I have that hope because we've gone through these Cycles before in history where people have become very invulnerable and very locked and closed and suddenly there's an explosion a creative explosion like in the 1960s like in the 1920s like in 18th century Europe with the Casanova and the where seduction reached its kind of apigy Etc so it has kind of swung back and forth between these moments where humans get incredibly closed and bitter and partisan and everything's conflict and everyone's divisive Etc and suddenly goes in the opposite direction I I have hope in that possibility and I structured my chapter to perhaps sweep that a little bit along that tie and see if I can have any effect well I I think what you just described in conversations like it and that stem from it are likely to have a tremendous effect I think it's exactly what's needed now and um certainly I'll be uh to amplify that message I I agree with everything you said and not just because you're sitting here as a guest uh on this podcast but because um it's clear to me that while power dynamics and seduction are um wired into our human relations since the beginning of time that we have reached a a a very challenging period in our history um it's somewhat of a relief to me to know that it's happened before but in a very different context uh we hear a lot about The Swinging back and forth of the pendulum uh someone in fact uh Peter AA online Physician's brother actually said I um so we'll credit him he said no it's not a it's not a pendulum that swings back and forth unfortunately now it's become a wrecking ball so it's swinging back and forth and doing damage as it as it reaches its um you know its extremes and I think that um I also look forward to a time where people um acknowledge that the injustices around them and and that have been done to them and others and um but somehow are able to transcend that and the word that I'd like to pick up on there is the word justice um it was pointed out to me uh by someone I respect very much that you know having a sense of justice is a is a wonderful and important thing and as humans it's important to how we structure Society but I do think that a lot of the negative things that we see out there nowadays are have something to do with the availability of uh ready availability of pornography high density calorie food Etc a bunch of things like that but that one of the issues with social media because it does have its positive aspects but one of the negative issues in my mind is that it's a steady flow of um examples of Injustice so all day long you're just seeing things like that that piss you off and that piss other people off and for different reasons but but what was pointed out to me is that one of the key things about a sense of Injustice is to be able to determine whether or not there's anything that you should do about it and I think that everyone now feels a bit hijacked by all the injustices we see because we feel like well we're supposed to do something about it but it may be that while we can't let every Injustice pass that being bombarded all day long with things that upset us is hijacking our creativity it's distracting us from our deeper purpose it's preventing a sense of vulnerability that would lead to a sense of deep love and and on so I don't think it's just about the The Lure the tantalizing lures of of sex food and um and looking at you know bodies and hearing voices on social media I think there is some validity to that but that it's also that you know there's just ample opportunity to go down the gravitational pole forces of Injustice like H that's so frustrating why are they doing that I mean I catch myself doing that talking to co-workers when I walk in about did you see this thing this is crazy what's going on with the their crazy when you know as opposed to thinking about anything else in that moment and I try and yank myself out of that but I I think that um you're not going to do it alone but I think you will play a major role in saving us from this because people I do I think because people just need to see themselves through a different lens and realize this is distracting me from who I'm supposed to be well a lot of what what modern life should involve is the ability to ignore certain things so for instance I don't know if you know that app next door oh right I used to have it but then I'd see all the the packages being stolen off my neighbor's porches in Oakland and then I started enjoying living in Oakland less and I love the city of Oakland it's got its problems it definely has its problems but as an East Bay kid you know and went to school out there and you know like I have deep love for the East Bay and it it's always had those problems but when you see stuff being stolen on your phone in the middle of the night when you wake up it creates a sense that like they're out to get my stuff right terrible right and so uh I have it in my spam filter but I look at it and and every headline is people stealing somebody broke into somebody's house this P dog bit me this's this rapid dog going around there's this homeless person that's yelling and attacking people on and on and on I feel like I'm living in this neighborhood it's like Beirut or something in the 1980s I can't even walk out my door I just got I don't look at next door anymore I just ignore it I don't open it ever because because I know that that they're designed algorithmically to put that in front of you every single time so that you click on it because that's we respond to that kind of stuff naturally we can't help it so you have to be able to shut that stuff up and look at what you can actually control in your life so I have this visceral dislike of what's going on in Ukraine because I was in Ukraine recently and I feel I've identified very strongly with their struggle right and and it just I can't that outrage feeling it just every time I read an article about it it just drives me crazy so the only thing is I stop reading as much as I can I read things that are kind of rational and intelligent and I send them money and I you know I donate as much as I can and I help them practically but I don't allow myself to get that kind of outraged feeling all of the time so somebody has to write a book somebody has to instruct Us in what to ignore and what to act pay attention to so there are things that you can control injustices that are out there that you could control by voting by certain by amassing a movement by you know dealing with climate change not by trying to recycle every little thing in your house but actually doing something really much more macro in the world you know joining a cause there are things you can do and that's positive and that's a way of channeling that kind of dark energy in you for a positive purpose but it's totally disruptive and it totally distracts you and weakens you and drains you of energy to fall into those rabbit holes and let them and let yourself fall into them so you have to learn the art of what to ignore and what not to pay attention to and understand that you're wired to see those kind of red alert buttons on Facebook or on next door wherever they are and it it's just it's it's negative it's like a candy rush you have to avoid it and it's taking us away from our purpose which we each have I mean I think to me that's the the most um delerious aspect unless unless your purpose is to organize and be an activist people ask me I wrote a lot about in my human nature book about the shadow side of human nature right and we all have it we all have a dark side we all have hidden aggression we all have feelings of Envy we all have feelings of grandiosity we all have aggressive impulses how do you deal with it and I say the way to deal is to channel it into something positive and pro-social and that could be putting it in your artwork venting that anger and that outrage and something that people kind of can identify with or it can be in organizing something that could be your purpose in life and actually doing something positive so that's the only way that you could actually use that energy for some kind of actual life's task or purpose you've been discussing lately a bit on some of your channels about masculine and feminine um let's say roles um and crisis of the masculine feminine dance as well as the crisis of masculinity per se crisis of femininity per se um do you care to expand on that a bit I think um we could probably take three four hours to explore all this in full um but I was struck by some of the things that you said um because I agree completely that um just as we are not given a road map When we arrive in the world as to how to find our purpose I think there's also a very conflicted road map that's thrown in front of us and indeed conflicting multiple road maps about what it means to be masculine or feminine or some combination of both which of course everybody is some combination of both just to varying degrees well um yeah so men have a feminine side to them which if you try to repress will come out in other ways and women have a masculine side of them I think Yung described this very well with the anima and the animous which I think is is extremely real um it's very very confusing times for both men and for women right now we don't know the roles that there there're everything is just so fluid and it's very very difficult particularly if you're young so young women are getting this idea that everything should be equal and that women should have and of course it's right should have be paid the same and should have the same career opportunities there should be no Prejudice or harassment or anything but at the same time on social media it's all about looking perfect and looks are are incredibly important and if you're not hot you're in terrible trouble and a lot of young girls are extremely confused by this they're getting mixed signals right and boys are even in perhaps even worse circumstance where being masculine is SE is something negative so we don't have any ideals out there anymore of what what constitutes a good positive form of femininity and a good positive form of masculinity in fact we even think that there shouldn't be anything like that there's no such thing as being masculine or feminine whatever it's very very confusing and so you know I I think of of of masculine traits that I think are very positive that should be out there to kind of counteract the sort of Andrew Tate seduction that a lot of young men are falling for and it's a kind of an inner strength where you're sort of in control of your emotions you're not invulnerable etc etc but um you can take criticism you can take PE you know you can have moments of failure and you'll bounce back but you have a kind of res inner resilience and a kind of inner strength a kind of a quiet calm that I think used to be exemplified in movie icons like a Gary Cooper type thing right and that kind of sense of inner calmness where you're not hysterical you're not getting upset about everything that happens where you have a kind of an inner strength and a confidence and you can withstand kind of what Ryan holiday talks about a lot about with stoicism you can withstand all of the hardships in life but you have that Citadel within you is a very very powerful form of masculinity as opposed to it's all about sleeping with a lot of women having really fast cars you know being abusive and being a bully etc etc these are signs of weakness of insecurity and to be masculine should be a sense of security and inner confidence and Inner Strength right and that's what we should venerate in our culture and we should have icons like that okay um it doesn't mean that that there's no role for men who are not masculine or have more of the feminine virtues that's also there's definitely a role for that and you know we see a lot of that in all sorts of Arenas of life and then there should be a positive model for women you know where instead of their appearances being judged by their appearances and having to conform to the ideals of what's hot or not it's about being incredibly powerful and competent and and have expertise and being really successful in your career and and as opposed to being continually judged by your appearances which is very damaging so these are terrible times I mean I I feel fortunate that I grew up in a time where there were these kind of models for me to go by and I think of my father who who was a very quiet man and he was he was just a middle class salesman is basically what he was he just sold for all his whole life he sold chemical supplies for one company um but he was very dignified he treated people well he was very calm and very quiet but he also was very empathetic that was my role model for what I think is a good masculine energy and I think a lot of people just don't have that and they're very lost and so I don't know what the answer is that I can't really produce that out of thin air but I wish I could well certainly nowaday is there many more um let's say examples and options of masculine and feminine qualities out there for observation because of social media and because of the internet uh and as you pointed out before a key feature to becoming a functional human being especially nowadays is learning what to ignore I mean there's an interesting idea in the circles around a nutrition and health that you know never before in human history have human beings been able to access such a wide variety of foods that are differ from what their ancestors ate and I don't even mean ancient ancestors I mean if you grew up in the Bay Area as I did in the 1970s and 80s there were a few ethnic restaurants but we ate the same you know 15 or 20 Foods over and over again right and then eventually that exploded into dozens of options and more and fusion foods and all sorts of things and so there is this idea in the nutrition communities that we are not hardwired to um think about and discern so many different food options that you know that's um and to taste so many distinct flavors whereas before people one portion of the planet or country ate generally one way in a given season if there's seasonality etc etc in a similar vein um we are now and children too are now um overwhelmed with a number of different options of how to express oneself both masculinity and femininity but generally speaking and so question is then how does one choose right how does one decide what's what's functional what works what's best what's me right everyone asking themselves who am I right I think all teenagers I find this fascinating ask themselves who am I adults don't tend to ask themselves that question but who am I I still ask myself question okay well that's good maybe I should ask myself that more often but um I think that we clearly have gone over a cliff with this stuff I don't think we're still at the point where we're kind of veering towards the edge of of confusion I think young people are really confused because the moment one assumes uh one clear and let's say balanced Mas set of masculine feminine attributes or maybe ver is a bit more masculine or a bit more feminine it's like um there are a million examples telling you that that's wrong I know and then sometimes has the tendency to Anchor to well no no I'm right because this is this is who I am and then all of a sudden you're you're in a larger battle so uh you know Gary Cooper's great love his movies um but we're like we now have a million variations on Gary Cooper um that don't look anything like the Gary Cooper you and I are talking about and a lot of people won't even know who we're talking about but I they I'm a dinosaur but perhaps it illustrates the point no i' not that you're a dinosaur but that um there is no single or even um set of masculine or feminine ideals so picking Role Models is something that I really truly internalize from your book mastery yeah you know there were a lot of lonely years for me and I won't get into the stories of just wondering like my what am I going to do you know I'm 13 my home was completely broken no semblance of the reality it was before you know who are the the males in my life I'm going to orient to and fortunately for me I assigned mentors to me whether or not they knew it or not that really helped me along and I changed them up as you recommend there wasn't one um I understood there was a breaking up process an integration process combining and threading together different things I think I truly believe that that's what's required then um it doesn't have to be 100% Gary Cooper it can be 10% Robert Green 10% someone else you know 5% this and creating a pie chart of sorts of you know who one wishes to be in a given context but that takes work it takes a bit of work and discernment but gosh that's powerful um and really credit goes to you because I you know you were a mentor of mine you didn't even realize it in the way that you forge and organiz information and there were others and but Mastery is where I learned to do that and this is not a podcast it's a sales pitch for Mastery but gosh it really taught me okay I have a graduate adviser she was wonderful and Brilliant but she didn't know how to explain a lot of things to me so I'd find someone else for that right and someone else for the other thing and someone else for the other thing and together create a patchwork of of really excellent mentors that made a lot of sense to me yeah yeah so I I think there's a a role for that process that you spell out in Mastery in the larger context of like could have become as a person and that includes masculine and feminine ideals yeah and and it's an ongoing process throughout your life so who you glommed on to when you were 14 or 15 will change when you're 19 I had a series of people like you're talking about my high school English teacher who had an enormous impact on me who taught me basically how to write I internalized his voice when I went to Berkeley I had a professor that who became my kind of surrogate father at Berkeley who I deeply admired for his level of scholarship so he became kind of an intellectual role model later in life when I finally wrote my first book I met a man y steers who was a book packager who understood the business Etc he kind of saved me he was sort of my mentor for the next phase in my life so on and on and on I found people but they have positive qualities qualities they admire they're not perfect everyone is flawed and so at some point maybe you see too many of the flaws you go on I need somebody new in my life but there's nothing wrong with that it's not like you're you're you're violating any codes or hurting them you move on to somebody else but the sense of finding people whose qualities you admire we don't learn from people just by following their ideas we pick up their energy their Spirit now you didn't necessarily pick up my energy or Spirit from Reading Master although Maybe you did I don't know but when you're interacting with that professor at Stanford or whatever it's not just verbally there's kind of a non-verbal communication going on you're internalizing some of the positive qualities that you saw in them and finding these series of mentors because I call it surrogate parents you can't choose your father and mother but you can choose these ideals for you can choose these mentors in your life you can kind of rewrite your family history and find that Father Figure You Never Had by glomming onto this person but it has to be the right fit it has to be someone that you connect to emotionally and intellectually and that has the positive qualities you wish for yourself well I'll embarrass you perhaps by saying that um since I was a freshman in college which is really when I turned my academic life around and really my life around I've maintained the same notebook with a list of names of people that I admire and who I'm um you know trying to emulate in some way not in every way certainly and the certain names have been crossed off but um most of them have survived and and certainly after reading Mastery your name made that list and um and I hope I'm not being crossed off at some point no not at all not not at all and through Reading Mastery there were there were additional names um you know I had the great the great Misfortune of having all three of my academic advisors die suicide cancer cancer which sounds tragic the joke in my field is you don't want me to work for you that's what that's what everyone says but by being essentially scientifically orphaned because there's a strong Mentor mentee relationship in science and progression through the career uh track it forced me to go out and find other people and also to learn how to quote unquote mother and father myself in the context of profession and I got a lot of help but um I I can't emphasize enough how valuable that practice is and so when one looks out on the landscape of social media options I mean these are literally just options of people to you know we call it following but um you know it probably should be called something else uh because following you know it fall short of emulating or attempting to emulate but I think that in the context of masculine and feminine ideals this is so critical but it's like the buffet of food is so enormous now right I mean you've got every cuisine on the table so speak we're we're not wired for that no and I know personally I I get very agitated and upset if I go to the market and I have to choose between 30 items and I have no idea what I want it makes me really cranky and upset whereas if I know okay I can have this food I can't have that I'm only looking for this okay it's easy it doesn't take two hours and waste my time too much choice is very detrimental to the human being I think and that's why going back to what I originally said when you have that sense of purpose about your life about what's important it does just infect your career but it infects everything you do so you know eating this food is going to drain me of my energy that I need to create this thing that means so much to me and energy and feeling my my brain active and alive is incredibly important value all right I'm not going to eat all that Sugar because it's bad for me right it means I'm not going to get outraged by these things on the internet because it's a waste of time I can't do anything about it it's just feeding on my you know on my I forget the part of the brain that's that's like the amydala or whatever right so no I don't want to go there right and on and on and on all these things in social media some of it's good some of it's interesting I can follow Andrew huberman's podcast and I enjoy that and I learn a lot from it but a lot of these podcasts are useless they're they're not helping me in any way so it gives you this kind of filter and this radar to cut out those hundred different choices that drive us absolutely crazy and I know maybe I'm partially I maybe maybe I'm a little bit I don't know I hate to say that maybe I'm partially on the Spectrum or something but I can't trans can't stand too many choices it completely drives me nuts so I always have to kind of funnel my energy into something to things that are productive and having a sense of your purpose whenever you discovered in your 20s hopefully gives you that ability to say these are the positive role models I want in my life these are the mentors and the thing about following people on social media is it's so easy it's just a click it doesn't mean anything a mentor relationship takes work it takes courage because you have to actually go up to somebody and physically ask for their help and a lot of people write to me say I'm afraid of asking this important powerful person to be their mentee right so it involves a sense of social courage where you have to literally engage with another human being who you admire and who you think is powerful so it's building your social skills Etc but it's a skill you develop you can't just follow someone you can't just watch their lectures you have to engage with them and you have to get over some of your fears and your anxieties in the process yeah and I might add to it uh I think everything you said is absolutely true and I think um engaging in the the various um tools that they recommend is immensely helpful like I think hear hearing about a book is great reading a book is even better um thinking about a book is even that you read is even better than that and and then uh writing down your own ideas and writing a book well that's that's the big win right and that's what the world I believe that's what the universe wants from us not necessarily to write a book but you know translate what I just said to any number of different Endeavors yeah you want to be able to think for yourself right so you're not just absorbing ideas from other people and kind of mimicking them and kind of just learning the exteriors of their ideas you want to kind of digest them and then have them slowly become your own ideas by interacting with them by Crea then putting them through your own lens so someday it's it's a book stirring in me is the art of thinking and how to use that kind of process and go deeper into it and I talked a lot about it in one of my podcasts which might be the seed of a book but it's it's the the difference between dead thinking and Alive thinking ideas can be either alive or they can be dead and an alive idea is something that enters your brain from an external Source a philosopher an article somebody you admire somebody you hate and then you absorb it and you think about it and you decide I'm going to turn it around into this and I'm going to make it alive and it's going to make it something that's part of me another part of an alive idea is um you have an idea that comes to you about a book or a project or something about the world and you go maybe that's not actually true maybe the opposite is true and you go through a process and you cycle through it on and on and you reflect on it and you refine this idea and maybe it turns into its opposite and through the process of reflecting and correcting and revising it you turn it into something living something alive within you right on and on and on and what prevents people from going through that process which would be the subject of my book is basically anxiety because I think how you handle anxiety is the most important kind of quality in life it'll determine whether you will be successful whether you will find your career path or whether you won't be able to I don't know if you can follow that idea at all but um anxiety is a signal to you that you don't understand something that that there's a problem out there that that you can't resolve and so what happens to most people if you're insecure is you glom onto something instant and easy to get rid of your feeling of anxiety I don't understand this problem oh it must be a must a must be the answer because this person said that right and so you don't develop the the ability to think you don't develop the ability to go to the next level but if you take that anxiety and you go all right maybe a is an answer and then you start going through a and then you go no maybe a isn't the answer maybe B is the answer you're able to surmount your anxiety and go past it further and further and further you don't rush for the first available answer that's out there right you're able to go through a process of refining things and so in your career if you're anxious for Success if you're anxious for money you're going to make the wrong choices but if you're able to deal with that anxiety and say maybe I'm I have to think more deeply about where I'm going I have to come up with other Alternatives then you're going to make a much better choice on and on and on so how if you're deal if you're a creative person it's very very challenging to have that blank piece of paper before you that book that you haven't written that film or whatever you're filled with a lot of anxiety and you have to deal with it and if you're able to turn into something creative and productive then great things will happen you'll create a masterpiece so the ability to deal with anxiety and to not give into the most instant gratification that you can get is to me a marker of somebody who will be creative and will invent something as opposed to people who just recycle old and dead ideas Amen to that I uh was once told that you know anxiety makes children of us all and not in the positive sense of being childlike you know it it regresses us to a mode where we feel a complete lack of control and I completely agree that being able to manage anxiety and and work dance with it since we can't rid ourselves of it no no perhaps nor should we right because it's a signal as you point out that we don't understand something that there's there's something to get curious about right a process or something out there or both I think uh that really resonates yeah and I think a lot of people will benefit from from hearing that because I think we hear the word flow and we just all imagine I even catch myself imagining that you know when Robert Green sits down to right it's like there's a blank sheet and then he just kind of meditates and then boom out come these books um but I you know if I get realistic for a second I'm sure that there's a lot of inner turmoil and anxiety oh my God you have no idea so um my process is is 95% pain and maybe 2 and a half% ecstasy and I don't know what the other 2 and a half% would be but um so I write a story because all in my new book in most of my books I always begin with a story from history Etc and it is so bad it I just I can't believe how bad how flat it is how it sucks I'm so embarrassed I hate myself then I go and I go dig into and I start changing the words in it I start making it a little bit better the second version It's kind of palatable but it still sucks it's if I let it out into the world be very embarrassing I work I it's an anxious you know and my wife can tell you I'm a miserable being when that happens everything looks black to me at that point and I push through it so if I gave in to my anxiety and this happens with a lot of books and writers I would just put out that second version which isn't very good it isn't very strong it isn't thought through because my ideas when I look at them the first time I go that's not real that's not the actual thing that's going on here Robert you've missed the mark you want to hit what's actually real in that story so you have to go deeper and deeper and harder and harder and harder so I don't just give up and go here's the chapter I go it's got to be better it's got to be better until finally after two months of struggling it seems like it's it's gone to the place that I wanted to be in right but I I use that anxiety to keep improving and making it better and then when I reach that point in the story is good enough and I can let my wife read it and then my editor I feel great I have that 2% moment of Joy but it came through all of that anxiety but I can tell you the feeling of f fillment when I finish a chapter is pretty damn great when I finish a book it's better than any kind of drug experience anyone could ever have it's such a wonderful feeling of accomplishment and pushing past all the barriers you know so my process involves a lot of anxiety and dealing with that's why I'm talking about it why I want to write a book about it thank you for sharing that um I'm attempting to write a book and have been for several years and now I feel a little bit better but clearly I need to ratchet down harder um but in other domains of life I I am familiar with the experience of tons of anxiety and just okay I'm going to just get to this one Milestone and then I'll figure out the next Milestone but even that process of saying okay I'm going to break this down into Milestones itself is anxiety provoking it's just that but at some point it generates enough inertia that you just that you just sort of stumble forward into the process and then keep going so try not to bloody oneself that's right too much yeah I think a lot people will benefit from hearing about that in fact I'm certain they will So speaking of anxiety you have a clip on the internet that we will provide a link to in the show note captions which I think is absolutely fabulous about how to find a romantic partner and or get more out of an existing romantic partnership I don't even remember what I said you're going to have to remind oh it's so good um one point in particular yeah that uh I remember um that I think is oh so true is that there needs to be at least one and probably several uh points of like real convergence in terms of one's interests or likes that go beyond like what food somebody likes or uh you know what type of house they want to live in but that actually traces back to these early forms of delight and you mentioned uh that for you and therefore presumably your partner that you know a mutual love and respect for Animals happens to be one of those things within the context of your relationship right that not that A Love For Animals is required for me it sure as hell is right exactly could never go out with a woman who didn't love animals right my sister used to tease me that um if a woman gave me a birthday card or a card that had a drawing of a particular animal which I'm particularly fond of my sister used I have an older sister and she used to say oh no it's over he's gone you know that it would you know um fortunately it's it's not that simple um but uh there's some truth to what she was saying um it's certainly uh it's necessary but not sufficient but maybe you could elaborate a little bit on this notion of um convergent interest and contrast it with a lot of what people tend to hear and say about what's important in Partnership because I think this is something that a lot of people grapple with both in terms of finding a partner and in terms of building partnership well um you have to you know there's you can there's different relationships you can have I mean do you want like a one week a one month relationship are you looking for something longer more satisfying that will entail you know maybe years of being together and um you know uh people can get very boring very quickly right particularly if you can't have a conversation with them about subjects that interest you and so you mention animals animals is a very good example because it's not I'm not saying that you both have to be Democrats or Republicans that's too banal and superficial but the Love of Animals reaches into your character reaches something deep inside of you or your dislike of animals if that happens to be the case but it signals something about it that's so Primal that's so connected to a child that there's going be a deep connection there and it's not like you have to both love cats which is good if that happens to be the case but just animals in general you love their energy you love the fact that they're that they're innocent in their own way you love the fact that they're not playing games with you you love the kind of instant love you can get from them kind of thing and you connect to them on that level is a very very positive sign because it goes beyond just intellectual things into something emotional and visceral so really the emotional connections the values that you have together are very important money is another one that's extremely important so if one of you is incredibly material oriented and it's all about money is is is power and success and comfort and the other isn't really into it it's into spending money Etc a lot of people have endless fights over something like money right where the there's no convergence there and money signals a deeper value about the person so I'm not saying there's anything wrong if money motivates you I'm not moralizing about it because that can signal a value that maybe you grew up without it and that feeling comfortable and feeling like you don't have to worry about something is very very important to you and the not being interested in money reveals something about your character so I'm telling people you want to look at the person's character and see a kind of convergence there and something that can last and I remember I was reading um for one of my books about Franklin Delo Roosevelt and Elanor Roosevelt and the thing of it was Franklin delanor Roosevelt was this incredibly handsome vibrant young man before he got polio very active very athletic very handsome all the women were after him he was like the perfect match he was wealthy and Elanor Roosevelt was like the ugly duckling she wasn't very pretty she was kind of socially awkward but he saw into her character he saw that intellectually she was a match for him he saw that they had kind of similar interests on that level that I'm talking about that go beneath just the surfaces and he chose Elanor and everyone was shocked about it you know nobody was was trying to court Elanor I've wrote her last name at the time I think she might have in being a Roosevelt um so it was very shocking he said I I looked at somebody who I could last with who had some qualities that were much more important to me and ended up being a very satisfying relationship of course later on he had his Dianes so it wasn't perfect but it was a very it was a very positive relationship so seeing your values in life you know when it comes to like money when it comes to like career when it comes to comfort or lack of comfort some people like not being comfortable they like being on the Ed Ed they want challenges they want to move from City to City kind of thing and if you partner with somebody who just wants to live in the same house you're going to have conflict after conflict after conflict the sex might be great and that might be good for a month or two months I have nothing against that I'm not going to judge that either but it won't lead to a longlasting relationship you know Sports and Athletics are another thing is a someone that likes the outdoors or is it someone who's you know like zaha Gabor and has to be in in a Time Square in a penthouse in Manhattan you know kind of thing so values that reach inside of a per character that are deeply ingrained that you can almost not change you can't control and there's a convergence there on several levels is a sign that you can have a deep connection with that person and it's very important and if those connections are good and there's a physical attraction because if without the physical attraction it will kind of fizzle out you've got a recipe for for incredible success for something that can really last and having a lasting relationship as I've had is is such an anchor in your life you know for me for someone who works as hard as I do and hopefully for her as well it just grounds me and it makes life so much simpler and easier and and it's not just simple and easy there's a lot of love and a great deal of of of deeper emotions involved but having a long-term relationship if you can have it is something that pays off in so many dividends so being able to find that kind of convergence you know when I first met my now my wife um I had a cat at the time I'd always been a dog person but this was a cat I had and I love that cat like hell I can't believe he was such a wonderful cat I brought her over to my apartment on the first date I wanted to see her reaction to the cat you know because I generally and I don't know people misjudge that women who don't like cats I I don't I can't get along with right because there's something feline in the feminine nature that I love and she loved my cat boy that was the best sign of all and things just Bloss and she loved me for loving a cat so there was a great convergence right there that we saw right away and there were other things but that was the first one I love that story and everything you just said suggests I believe that in order to find the right partner and to build an existing partnership that hopefully feels at least partially right to people that it requires at least some knowing of self Because unless you know your character one's own character then it's impossible to really determine if somebody else's character is going to mesh well with it or not self-awareness is is actually the most important quality in life for all aspects but yeah I mean if we go by social pressures a man will choose a trophy wife who looks sexy and hot and will impress all of his male friends etc etc you go by the things that culture tells you that these are the right images for you right and then there won't be any connection to you because you're choosing for purposes that don't connect to who you are and so you have to know yourself you have to know what you love you have to know what you hate I think most people know that they love animals or don't love animals I think most people know that they like stability or they like things to be kind of slightly chaotic I don't think you have to go through deep levels of introspection but what you have to do is when you're involved in a relationship you have to think that those things matter that's the problem you tend to think that those things matter you think that sex matters more than anything physical attraction matters or you think that the person having a lot of money matters etc etc you don't think that this other aspect is important if you value what I'm talking about then your self-awareness will kick in because you really basically know these essential basic parts about your own character I think people sometimes get um distracted by admiration of qualities that they might find admirable but that don't mesh with their own character I've seen this many times before where examp well uh where someone will say well there someone will start listing off the positive attributes of the person that they happen to be dating like he does this blank blank and blank she does this you know he volunteers Etc and that's all great I mean volunteering for good causes I'm all in support of that but then what they're overlooking often it seems is whether or not that's a core value for them or whether or not it's just something that they admire I hear a lot of admiration in the early days of relationships that later I hear about failing and what you're talking about is something deeper more uh aligned with one's own sense of self and it almost um leads me to use the word you know sort of a more about energetics it's like merging of people's energies which sounds very new Agy and that's not my intention but but I think it relates to something that we do hear a lot about and I think is valid which is how it feels to be around somebody in different context like do we feel at ease do we feel lightness and ability to express ourselves and to um and do we enjoy and admire them in their expression as opposed to just admiring what they do they've accomplished blank blank and blank I see right they uh manifest these qualities that I wish I had right you hear that and and aspire to have which is very different than a meshing of of energies also there a couple other things you have to understand their character as well and people can be very deceptive and very slippery and can wear masks one telling sign that I've noticed in my own relationships in the past is that the woman would be a certain way with me that I thought was very good and I liked and then the moment we were with other people she acted in a way that was very irritating it's like a different character and I really kind of fell out of love with her when I saw her in social interactions she revealed so with me she was almost wearing a mask and playing a game but the moment she entered a different circumstance I saw other aspect to her character so you also have to be very attentive to their character what lies underneath that they have some of these values that they're not just trying to win you over for whatever and they're playing along with you the other thing that's very important is a sense of mystery so a partner can become boring very very quickly right after a year you know every single thing about them right they're going to say the same things the conversations go around found in circles it's just you've reached an end there's no surprises there's no mystery you want somebody where they have corners that you don't really see at first that they surprise you sometimes suddenly there's a quality that you hadn't suspected before so people who are too obvious who are too familiar who show everything instantly they're going to end up boring you right but people who have a bit of Reserve I I know this is maybe I'm I'm projecting my own values on the world but people who who kind of intrigue you that you don't fully understand that make you want to know more and if they can be like that after two years or three years or five years wow that's fantastic but the sense of I know every single thing about this person they never surprise me anymore is what kind of breaks the the the enchantment and leads to the end of the relationship well the idea of more to learn about somebody um perhaps also suggests that they are continuing to evolve into forage in the landscape of life you know that they're not fully baked right that which I think is um an interesting idea in during the four episode series that we did on Mental Health Paul kti a psychiatrist said that um a matching of generative drives which he defined as the desire to create something in the world of One's Own expression is really critical in relationship and he said you know it matters less whether or not one person likes classical music and the other person rock and roll provid that their relationship to music is similar or something of that sort like that it's about a drive to of a certain sort to engage in the world so one person could love music the other person's not into music but the way that they approach life is one of perhaps Mutual curiosity desire to find out Etc and that this exists on a Continuum uh I'm curious if uh it seems to jive with what you're with what you're saying it does but the only thing I would add is if you love classical music and they love like heavy metal music you're going to be driven crazy pretty quickly it's going to you know it's not going to mesh with you and I know I would have that problem you'll both be in headphones a lot right so the fact that you both have because music is like animals in a way so I agree completely with what you're saying but I would say maybe music isn't the best example because music says something very deep about a person right there and you know I'm not saying one is superior to the other but it reveals something that's nonverbal that that kind of gives you a window into who they are so if they like punk rock like you do and I grew up on punk rock there's a rebellious thing this to there's an anti-authoritarian quality that's very strong you get you get to see that through them if they like modart and soft string quartets there's somebody that kind of values softness and tranquility and peace and you're not like that so the music kind of shows you something a quality about their character that can be very telling can be very eloquent and so it doesn't mean that you both have to love The Clash or the dead kennedies or whatever showing my own Generation Um but that you both have that rebellious streak and that rebellious streak could be you like there's classical music composers who could be pretty damn rebellious and angry you know and I actually kind of like them so that convergence I think is a positive one kind of thing but in general I agree with that I'm curious about the nonverbal communication component of all types of relationships but let's stay in the landscape of romantic relationships for the moment yeah maybe include professional relationships too because what you just described is really about a resonance around the non-verbal stuff I mean it can be articulated with words yeah um I love animals I love this music this is the best song like did you see that like otter are amazing right this kind of thing but language is just an attempt to place you know words on a Feeling in those instances so it it can be classified as non-verbal um with respect to non-verbal communication you've written fairly extensively about the fact that people often communicate with their body and facial expressions um I'm certainly familiar with the somewhat if not not very eerie sensation of somebody um smiling like a toothy smile and then it as they pivot away that smile just dissolving very quickly and um you know you don't have to be a neuroscientist or a psychologist to realize that like there was something quite false about that experience or that this person experiences um emotions like step functions on off on off which is not how most of us experience emotions most of us experience emotions with some pervasiveness like I was happy walking in the door because of something happened before and so I'm going to smile while I'm walking in the door if I see something shocking and dismaying of course I'm going to frown I'm going to wipe away that smile but those are rare instances so um let's talk about the mouth the eyes the face the body in the context of communication what are what are some important things to P attention one that I I I I wanted to go back on as far as convergence is sense of humor is extremely important right so it's not like you both like the same comedians but if one person likes runchy humor and the other person doesn't that's that's a problem and also the fact that the person doesn't have a sense of humor or doesn't make you laugh is a very very bad sign so I wanted to add that one component in there I'm so glad you did uh someone who can make me laugh has uh you know necessary but not sufficient but boy it's uh approaching sufficient yeah I'd say so I'd say so um you know when it comes to the Art of Seduction The Art of Seduction is a nonverbal language that you must Master it's a language of the gifts that you give it's a ma it's a language of of how you smell it's a language that you TR that you communicate through the eyes etc etc and the thing you have to understand about the human being is that we evolved for much longer period of time without words than the small 40 35,000 years that we have symbolic language so during that vast period of Darkness where we did not have words words we were non communicating non-verbally we were picking up signals from people we were watching every little detail of their behavior because we didn't have words to decipher it so it's wired into our brains to have an amazing sensitivity to people's non-verbal Communications we can almost be telepathic that way if we learn that language the problem is we have the capacity but we don't develop it at all because we are so word oriented you're just listening to people if you're even listening to them at all you're just hearing the words and you're so thinking that the words mean something the words are sincere which they're often not at the same time that you're listening so much to words people are shuffling in their chair they're kind of looking away they're looking at other women or other men their voice is kind of trembling when they say something that where it shouldn't tremble their eyes are dead the smile is kind of fake you're not watching any of it so the most important thing in non-verbal communication law number one is pay attention to it continually develop the practice of shutting off the words and watching people almost as if you took the television and muted it right and just watch their behavior it's not easy and it's not natural because it's the words the words the words we want to we want to focus on them right but your ability to turn that television off to mute it will suddenly open up so many things about people they reveal so much things Sigman Freud said people are continually oozing out all of their secrets through their non-verbal Behavior you can read them like an open book if you master this language and I have the laws of human nature I described the story of Milton Ericson I don't know if you're familiar with Milton Ericson perhaps the greatest modern master of non-verbal communication he was a an amazing psychologist he sort of um is the inspiration behind um n what's it called n help me out here neuro linguistic oh the NLP I mean it's kind of a bastardization of his ideas but he's he created hypnotherapy he's the person who created hypnotherapy certainly I uh hypnotherapy is is a valid psychiatric practice I mean it's excellent clinical data to support well Milton Erikson had Polio when he was 19 and he was paralyzed his entire body was par paralyzed he couldn't even move his eyeballs right and he sat in bed and he had a very active mind and he was going to just die from sheer boredom and what he did during the two years of being paralyzed like that was just watching People's non-verbal communication and making notes in his brain and learning every single he learned the 20 different forms of yes the hundred different forms of no right every intonation how somebody entered the room how they left the room you know how they looked at him with the pity or empathy or something he mastered it and then when he became a psychiatrist and he treated people they thought he was psychic he could see everything into them it's because for two years that's all he could do was Observe them he couldn't speak he couldn't do anything he couldn't read a book so you have that same power but you don't have polio obviously but you have to first pay attention to it right it's an amazing thing once you do it's a lot of fun actually and I tell people go to a cafe one day in your city wherever you live and just watch people because you can't hear them they're a few tables away watch their non-verbal Behavior as they interact and see if if you pick up cues from them and they're things that are signs of genuine emotions so for instance an exercise you can do is you go up to somebody from an angle where they can't see you coming up to them and you surprise them you go hey hey Mike whatever they turn for that second their expression reveals how they really think about you you'll detect if you can pick up micro expressions and and you can they're only like one 150th of a second but they're there you can express a kind of and they smile you can see the little disdain in their eyes right then the mask comes on right right or you're talking to them they're looking at you but their feet are facing in an opposite direction that means that they're dying to get away from you kind of thing these are signals that you don't necessarily pay attention to their posture will tell you everything about their levels of confidence right on and on and on the fake smile if you can just Master the ability to detect the fake smile it will go wonders for you because you're able to see what you really want to do is to see the person with a genuine smile particularly in romantic relationships someone whose face lights up a real smile lights your whole face up it doesn't light your mouth that these parts of your face go up your eyes get alive there's like there's like a a neuro thing going on in your brain that's changing your whole facial expression and it means that someone genuinely likes you they're genuinely interested in you they're genuinely laughing or connecting to you man and if you can see that it'll help you so much in the Romantic realm and then it'll help you get away from those toxic people that are continually faking interest in you because a narcissist a toxic person thrives by deceiving you with a Charming alluring front that makes you come into their world then they can hurt you then they can do something to you right then they have you in in in their in their you know in their trap right so being able to see that they're not genuinely interested in you that they're faking it will help you avoid very toxic relationships and as I said to you I don't know if we were on air or not but deep narcissists have dead eyes they they almost can't help it they can fake the smile they can fake everything else but the eyes you have to be able to read it because you say well what are dead eyes you'll know it when you see it there's no life in them they're like looking through you they're not looking at you they're looking through you what can I get of you you're what they call a selfobject they're an object for you to use and that's how they're looking at you like they would look at a hammer or something yeah the concept of dead eyes and also alive eyes is so fascinating because um as audience of this podcast will know that because I've said it too much but I'll say it again that the eyes are the only two pieces of your brain that are outside the cranial Vault I mean they're literally two pieces of brain lining the back of your eyes and the Dynamics of the pupils those changes of course reflect how bright or dim it is in the room but they also reflect levels of arousal that are on the millisecond time scale so as one expresses you know words of um of Glee right the pupils constrict a little bit believe it or not or excuse me dilate a little bit I got it backwards there for a moment um and vice versa you know as one feels uh less less excited um sort of moments of Despair expressions of Despair the pupils should get a little bit smaller because arousal is going down and so I think you know we pick up on these things at a unconscious level do um the deadness of the eyes is is kind of the the um the the conclusion that that pops out at us if we're paying attention but the problem is it love it registers unconsciously but we don't give it any value to it we trust our words we trust our rationality as opposed to our intuitions about people so sometimes when you meet a person for the first time signals go up in your mind brain something's wrong about them and then you forget it because you don't trust those initial unconscious signals that your brain is giving you right so you have to you have to first kind of trust that this that these intuitions are very valuable the other thing is pay deep attention to the tone of voice The Voice as actors will tell you is like the hardest thing to fake right it's very hard to fake excitement your voice either has it or it doesn't it's very hard to fake confidence and you can I mean books have been written about that I'm not going to go into all the the details about it but the person will reveal so much of their emotional of the emotions that they're experiencing particularly levels of confidence you know like a trembling Voice or something or a booming confident voice which some people can fake but often it's very difficult you can still see through it and on the level of Seduction women men are very very attuned to the voice of a woman but we're not aware of it because the voice of our mother had an incredible impact on us in early early early childhood her singing her the tone of her voice that was probably the first seduction that we ever went through and a woman's voice has tremendous power over us right and so hearing a voice that kind of grates or irritates you is is something that's that's a bad side and that goes deeper than all the characteristics that we were talking about but a woman's voice that kind of reminds you of that mother that sing song you whatever feeling it was that's that's somebody that's that can very easily seduce you yeah there's a um there's a place for uh naming this of it's like subcortical courtship uh you know you know below the cortex as a the geeky neuroscientists like myself say you know you're getting down below the cortex with all of this stuff you know convergence of of real uh loves and desires I mean we express with words we sense the world using of course our cortex but we're really talking about getting into the the subcortical stuff that is the stuff of our history the stuff of our um hardwiring and our unique our uniqueness I couldn't help but think about the fact that earlier we were talking about the now you know infinitely vast number of choices of things to engage in people to engage with Etc but at the same time as you were now talking about um these micro inflections and the subtleties of voice and bodily communication that whether or not it's emojis or people sending filtered images or the default to text message communication that is so prominent now it seems like we now have more choices so uh more input but the sort of qualitative differences between the inputs have been binned into a couple of simple bins as if it's as if we've um regressed to primary colors only um but the canvas is huge or may I don't know if that analogy works but you you get the idea because ultimately in order to develop good choices about profession romantic relationships friendships you need a lot of examples and a lot of information that allows you to glean the subtlety um but as long as it's emojis and filtered pictures taken at a particular angle you know usually from above ask for the picture your head on and Below send me a picture of your worst your worst expression um all of that um it seems that there's now increased opportunity for deception and I don't just mean people misleading others I also mean us misleading ourselves like oh my goodness how could I be so disappointed yet again about particular landscape of life it doesn't just have to be romantic interactions it could be other Landscapes like how could I be fooled well you're fooled because the the uh the inputs were deficient not good data as we say well the thing is if things are you're immersed in the virtual realm it's very very hard to master the non-verbal communication aspect which is so important so if you're dating from an app and you're flipping through and then you find that person you've missed out on the greatest experience of life which is actually having to go out to a bar or go to a restaurant or go to a social event and have to literally encounter another person and deal with looking at their their behavior and kind of assessing who they are it's a muscle that you have to pay attention to non-verbal communication and if you're just you know going through the Emojis or going through the Tinder apps that muscle completely atrophies you have no power you're not able to decipher anything and that's what's happening with a lot of people who are using these ABS a social skills are like any skill at all they you have to develop them it's a muscle you have to develop and you've all noticed this probably in your own life if you've gone through a period where you're kind of retreating you don't want to be around people and you spend a month like that and then you go out you feel awkward it takes you like a couple days to get used to being around other people you say stupid things your body language is awkward but if you're in a situation for months where you're constantly interacting people you're on a film set and day in day out day out that skill starts developing but you have to be out there in the world you have to be interacting you have to be looking at people's emotions you have to be gauging them in real time we're not built for virtual encounters we're creatures of human of Flesh and Blood and we need to be looking at each other in the eye and paying attention to all these little details these nuances that you can only get in person a on those lines what are your thoughts about Ai and how that's going to shape our um sense of self sense of others and relationships as if that's a topic that could be covered in uh a series of minutes but what what are your um what are your top Contour maybe even deeper thoughts about AI well I'm G to I'm going to piss a lot of people off but I'm I'm kind of very concerned about it um I mentioned before about anxiety the role that anxiety plays in thinking you come upon an IDE idea and you go yeah that's all good then you go to the next level and it becomes better then you go oh maybe that's not so good then you go to the next level you go to level three and it gets better and better you have anxiety another aspect of intelligence is self-awareness right the be to look at yourself go I have biases I have confirmation bias I have conviction bias I have recency bias I have to counteract these things I also have a dark side I have aggression I have to be aware of how they color my thinking my emotions the third quality that goes into int I'm talking about now intelligence not artificial intelligence to be able to deal anxiety and go to a third level intelligence is the ability to look inside of yourself and see your own biases and the third thing is the ability to see a holistic picture the kind of aha moment that scientists have where you accumulate all kind of data points and then out of nowhere an image comes to your mind of yeah there's the answer you see the whole thing you see the whole G right Simone vile compared it to a a um a square Cube you can only see a cube from one side or you can never see a a square Cube you can only see a side of it if it's rotating you're still only seeing sides of it only in your mind can you picture the whole thing so the mind has to go through a process to have holistic thinking if they can invent a machine that can deal with anxiety and has has anxiety and it can go to level three if they can make a machine that can be self-aware that can go the people who program me have biases therefore I have biases I also have a dark side because people have programmed me who have a dark side if this machine can also think holistically beyond all of the data points and all the mass of information it's combined it can have that aha moment all right I can see a human consciousness I can see creativity there the other thing I would say is when I was a student at Berkeley going way back I was 19 years old I decided One Summer was is a big paradigm shift for me I'm going to take this class in ancient Greek in six weeks they teach you a year of ancient Greek that means every day you have an exam every Friday you have a final exam eight hours every day of a dead language I thought this would be the best discipline for me after someone who didn't been doing too many drugs to be honest with you okay and so finally at one point they give us this paragraph of the hardest ancient Greek writer of all to read this was near the end through cities or through kitties as they say I stared so I had I had like the whole night to try and translate one paragraph I couldn't figure it out you have to understand the the weirdness of ancient Greek all the endings the weird ways of thinking the whole picture that aha moment was eluding me at one point I thought I got it and I translated it and I gave it to the teacher next day I remember he was this kind of hippie that you'd have at Berkeley Dennis classic Professor but also a hippie the fact that you knew his first name is very telling I can only remember his first name Dennis he he's he said Robert I can see your thinking but you need to go to another level you missed you didn't have that aha moment you didn't put the whole thing together you were close but you didn't you have to try harder and that stuck in my mind forever like whenever I have a problem I have to think harder I have to go to that next level now what would happen if I had pulled out my translation of thusi and just copied that out right or what have happened if I put it through chat GPT and it gave me the translation that muscle in my brain that I have developed for 40 years that allows me to write books would never have developed and that muscle is I don't know the answer here I have to go to another level I have to try harder I have to think I have to think I have to have that engine woring around right but if I just grab for chat GPT it's deadened and then we're going to have a whole generation of people who stop thinking who don't go through that process you know you've heard of Douglas hter I think he said people train to go to Mount Everest it takes months physical exertion it's painful then they climb M Everest they see the top whoa what a great moment he said chat PT be the equivalent of taking a helicopter to the top of Mount Everest without any of that training and having the same moment it's not the same right you need to go through that process you need to go through that pain and if you just and the thing of is Chad gbt we think we're so modern So Sophisticated but really we're just seduced by Magic you put it in there and you see the scrip going whoa It's like magic it's like a magician but it's empty it's like not your brain functioning right it's p it's the Pagan part of us we like that kind of magic as opposed to actually having to go through the thought process itself so I'm not in FA against having tools I use tools I use the internet I use Google I'm searching for like some factoid from my book I find it I use it I I like it but I've also learned to develop my brain to think to get that engine constantly moving and I'm deeply concerned about G people who can't learn a foreign language who can't master anything who just immediately grab the first answer that it generates etc etc I have concerns I am too and I was thinking a moment ago that you know like some people might hear what you just said and say oh well the same thing was probably said about the automobile like how many amazing experiences of walking from one place to another are going to be lost when people start driving from one place to another but I think a key difference and this certainly aligns with everything you just said is that what you're talking about is not just arriving at the same destination you're saying the destination itself is different when one exerts some effort and experiences some anxiety to get there so it's not the same as automobile versus horse versus walking versus airplane it's fundamentally different because the the journey transforms the outcome yeah yeah I I'm in agreement with you about many aspects of AI I'm also excited about it in the context of certain things I I I I agree with you it could be a tool but are we operating the tool the tool operating us is what I'm talking about I am concerned a bit too especially in the context of what we've been talking about for most of today's discussion about um avatars replacing our online personas too much um you know the Avatar of ourselves is already taking place through through filters through uh reduction of emotional expression to emojis through reduction of of language to a diminished number of words to explain one's feelings you know a prior guest on this podcast um Lisa Feldman Barrett who's an expert in emotions talked about how the moment that a culture has a word for a particular subset of anxious feelings so so for instance she taught me that in Japanese there's a word for the sadness one experiences when they get a bad haircut yeah I know you know and so that normalizes the feeling and leads to feelings of less despair as opposed to what now many kids especially grow up Lear learning which I'm anxious I'm sad I'm depressed that you know in science we say there are lumpers and there are Splitters and they've been arguing for years about like is that one brain structure well if I name those two things next to each other two different things not only can I name one after myself which is what tends to happen so to speak but when you have too many lumpers or too many Splitters things are either overly simple or overly complex that of course the right answer the the the best use of naming things arve someplace in the middle that's how a field progresses cuz if you if you lump things together too much a field can't progress you give yourself the illusion that it's progressing but it's not progressing but if you split things up into a million different subcategories like just even the word adrenaline is also called epinephrine and that's has to do with basically people arguing over who got credit crazy and it's confus people for for decades yeah and there's a there's another story there that and I know far too much about the scientists involved and the there was a love triangle about naming of certain parts of the nervous system that oh yeah people sleeping with other people's partners and love triangles have created more drama of gnomen clature in science I I could do a whole hour on this um in any case I what I'm hearing from you is that we cannot afford to lose our sense of nuance and also because that sense of nuance Taps into what we're really experiencing and AI threatens that that we can become avatars of oursel well look at it this way we we worship technology it's our new religion okay and we worship chap GPT as if it's a God and seriously there's religious elements going on here what we really should worship is the human brain which is the greatest creation in the known universe I'm afraid it is the most complex piece of matter in the entire universe the number of neurons the number of synapses the number of possible connections between neurons is infinite practically infinite it is a wondrous instrument it is so powerful we've we've very scratch the surface of what we can use for it let us worship that brain that's in your head you only have so many years to use it you have so many use to develop it it is so wonderful and Powerful that can bring you such pleasure so much power in life so tools are fine we all need tools we all need we need hammers we need Nails we need saws Etc but the real thing is the hand that uses it the brain that connects the hand to the Hammer that knows how to to hit things you know I think of the of the um the great painter Renoir in the 19th century he had like a a stroke or something that the last years he couldn't move his right arm which was she painted with and it was disastrous so what he did is he put the brush in his mouth and he painted and he painted some beautiful paintings that way because his brain had mastered the art of painting not his hand but his brain had mastered it so well that he could actually paint well with the brush in his mouth because he could direct it and he he had the knowledge of how to make something perfect the brain is absolutely incredible the plasticity of the brain which I'm discovering after my stroke is absolutely a miracle you know what I don't know is it Professor Schwarz at UCLA who was studying OCD and how he was able to kind of cure people of OCD through certain plasticity exercises that he had making them aware of their kind of brain lock Etc and getting them out of it the that plasticity of the brain is by far the greatest Miracle of all and it goes on into your 60s and 70s and on onward let's all get down on our hands and knees and worship the brain and if we did it would create a complete shift in our values and we wouldn't be so instantly seduced and enamored and worshiping the technology we would worship the brains that create the technology instead of you know the other way around I certainly got a fan of brains and their uh potential for plasticity sitting over here uh I have the benefit of having my scientific great-grandparents are Hub and weasel who won the Nobel Prize for neuroplasticity during the critical period say that again so my scientific great-grandparents are David hubel and toron visel David's dead torsten's still alive he's 96 and they won the Nobel Prize for essentially discovering the critical window early in development where plasticity is especially robust they did other things too they should have won two nobels frankly uh for their other work on Vision but um one thing that they missed however was something that you mentioned and is worth highlighting again which is that the brain maintains the capacity for immense plasticity throughout the entire lifespan that's absolutely clear the conditions change from early to later in life but your specific situation really highlights that and it's something I'd really like to um talk about for a few minutes if if you're willing um as you mentioned you experienced a stroke um and perhaps uh it was aware to some but perhaps not all especially the people just listening to this podcast and who are not watching on video that um your shirt while very nicely designed um in uh in its original state also includes some unique stitching so maybe you could share with us uh what and for those listening there's a there's a jagged line of stitching that um extends from uh Robert's uh left short sleeve to his midline to where the buttons on his shirt are and from the from his right short sleeve also to the midline offset from one another these um this is the sort of stitching that looks like perhaps I had been at the sewing machine um and not somebody was uh skilled but they did a good job basically putting it back together why are those stitches in your shirt tell us about the stroke and let's let's talk about neuroplasticity it could also seem like a fashion statement you know but it really it isn't um well it was May of 2018 it was my birthday and my wife gave me this shirt I have a love of plaids it's like I don't know why I just love patterns and plaids must be like some Scotch part of me some ancestor thing but I love plaids C can I interrupt you just briefly forgive me everyone's going to get upset that interrupt do you know that there is a fundamental circuit in your visual cortex designed to detect plaid patterns no I did not yes and we can talk about why that is it's tightly tightly linked to your ability to perceive motion really yeah and we can go over it some other time but yeah so we'll talk about just as a cue so okay yes back to your birthday okay so she gave me a plaid shirt knowing how much I loved it and I love this shirt I love the colors in it etc etc and then two months three months later August 17 2018 I was driving my car she was with me I was pulling out into traffic I started driving and suddenly she's saying pull over Robert pull over go why why I can drive I'm fine and then suddenly everything started getting really strange everything looked strange my voice didn't sound the same and she was like freaking out but she was actually fairly calm which was amazing I was undergoing a stroke I had a blood clot that was blocking the bra blood flow to my brain I actually at one point got out of the car like I was I don't know what the hell I was thinking and then she pulled me back in and then the rest goes blank and I had had some weird Sensations that still remain with me because essentially I was on the verge of dying because blood not flowing to your brain is basically the end of you right unless something happens very quickly and she either that or you're can to get severe brain damage so she called 911 right away she recognized something my whole face was looking funny and they got there I was unconscious and essentially they took the his shirt and I just scissored the thing in half and took it off my head and then they intubated me I believe in my hip area to get something the blood clot was in my neck and they were able to free it up and they rushed me to the hospital and I'm unconscious and then um I wake up and I'm in a gurnie in the hospital and I don't for a moment I'm thinking maybe I'm dead because I'm lying in a gurnie and I almost feel like I'm in a coffin I don't know what what's going on and I have all of these weird Sensations and I I tell people we're so curious about death we think about death a lot and you know is it final what does it mean we really should pay attention to dying dying is actually much more interesting in some ways than death and people who have died go through a process if it if it's long enough and people who have had near-death experience experiences like I do have gone through that process of dying and have come back to life and in the process of dying strange things happen to the brain right so particularly with a stroke or something like that where blood stops flowing to your oxygen stops flowing to your brain you have kind of visions and things that you might think are hallucinations but that later seem like actually you are actually glimpsing the reality as opposed to the illus that the brain creates so I've written about this in my new book but um my idea of the brain is that it creates endless series of Illusions for you it creates this seamless version of reality the sense of a self the sense of a continuous self Through Time right it creates a linear sense of time progressions it creates colors it creates a world that visually you can seems familiar and etc etc but it's all illusion it's all a construction right images come into your brain and they're not organized in any way and the Brain organizes in a way that you can understand it well when you're dying all of that scrambles up and you actually are seeing something else so I saw for instance that I really don't have a self that it doesn't really actually exist that I'm and the image that came to my mind because it was in sitting in that gurnie was a weird feel feeling of like I can almost not explain it but it's as if you took an image of something real in the world and you completely scrambled it up and it was all wavy and you couldn't see what exactly it was to me that was the image I had of the self there are like 50 different selves inside of you that are all competing and you think there's just one and you think it's consistent but there's not it's an illusion the self is literally an illusion that your brain constructs when you're dying you see these things when you're dying you see other things like that you see that time is something very weird so I had experience of when I got out of the car and I got pulled in I thought like 10 seconds had passed my wife told me no those those was like 10 minutes I had no sense of time everything was scrambled and so it was very very El it taught me so much things that I can I can barely even expressed now I'm always now thinking of strange things that come to me because my brain was damaged it made me realize that the brain creates everything so I can't communicate with my hand my fingers I can't communicate my brain can't communicate with my leg right so you think that walking and writing and handling things is just your your body operating a certain way it's your brain telling you how to move these different things when that brain stops functioning you realize how much your brain determines everything it all starts there and when there's damage to your brain your whole thinking Alters Etc not to mention how you look at life itself after something like that so it was a terrible experience it's ruined so many things that I loved in life but it's given me an awful lot as well in return that I could go on for hours and talk about because it was the most powerful experience of my life when you were going through your reemergence to Consciousness in the hospital did you feel as if you were observing these multiple versions of yourself um maybe a different way to phrase it is did you feel you were sort of behind the circuit board that is your brain observing how you normally function and you could see multiple versions of self or was it something else where you sort of outside of your body and brain I think it was more outside of my body and brain I also had this other thing that happened where I you know sometimes you can't reme your memory might be playing tricks on you so I've also have to realize that maybe I'm not remembering exactly what happened or that I've since translated in a different way so that's a caveat here and I'm aware of it but I had this Vision that I was dead at first when I first became conscious and that I was up in the sky and I was looking down and my mother and my wife were talking and was like over my grave I suppose and I had this feeling huh everything's okay I'm gone but life goes on they're they're doing fine it's okay right so I don't know about that sense of self whether it was like I'm aware of it happening but I have a feeling it was something from the outside I don't really know the answer to that because it's very confused the other feeling I had was life when I was having the stroke was life draining out of me and my bones getting softer and softer and softer and I can't really logically explain that the feeling of Bones softening up and dissolving but for weeks and months afterwards I could access that feeling of my bones dissolving Etc it was a feeling of all your energy draining out of you and you're dying literally so um reading books about near-death experiences cuz that's a lot of what I'm big part of my next book God is it's fascinating there's so many interesting things to go in because it teaches us so much I'm so glad a you survived your stroke B that your mental faculties he's not more grateful than I am I tell I probably not but still very grateful so there it just um illustrates how grateful you must be um B that you've maintained if not grown your mental fact faculties I mean you seem extremely sharp um I promise you you're not missing a beat uh you know one always wonders right actually one of the most common fears people have is that somehow they're losing their mind or their memory and people aren't and they aren't aware of it you know you hear I have family members who have asked that if they ever start to exhibit signs of severe dementia that I um well put an end to them which I won't um that's not my place in this world um but I think it's a common fear among uh among people but you're still extremely sharp uh and thank good for it and you mentioned that um while you've lost certain abilities that new appreciation and new abilities have surfaced um could you perhaps share what some of those are and and what they mean to you um because I think that when one hears about somebody having a stroke we tend to focus on what's what's lacking but clearly this has been a transformative experience also in positive ways well uh I had to confront some of my own demons I had to confront the sense that um I expected things out of life and here they're taken away and I'm I'm I'm kind of ungrateful for being alive and here I'm pissed off that it takes me 10 minutes to tie my shoes and I can't really button my shirt I had to learn what really matters and to have patience and stuff the other thing was I used to love hiking I was very physically active and I'm sitting at my window in my office and see people running up and down bicycling walking their dogs God I'm so envious if I had if I could walk a dog right now I'd be the happiest person alive but then I go through a thought process which maybe isn't completely healthy which is they're not aware of how wonderful it is just to walk a dog but I'm aware of it so when I go out in my backyard and I can't walk and I'm seeing like I know this is going to sound really trically and sentimental but I see you know butterflies or things in my garden I'm like wow that's incredible you know things like that that I I couldn't appreciate before because I'm I'm sedentary and I can't move I have to suddenly pay attention to what's around me not take it for granted and find and suck all the pleasure out of it that I can so now when I sit at my desk to write my new book it's 4 hours because that's all I can stand maybe three sometimes those 4 hours are like such Bliss for me I truly appreciate it now because I know that my brain was almost gone right so it means so much for me and to just be alive you know is is is is just a wondrous experience I have a chapter in my new book called awaken to the strangeness of being alive and it's about the fact that if you think about it and how unlikely it is that we humans evolved at all even that we even exist all the bottlenecks and evolution that we had to pass through including The Disappearance of the dinosaurs and the emergence of manimals but there are 20 other huge bottlenecks throughout the history of evolution we had to pass through all of those we nearly went extinct 80,000 years ago from some virus that infected there were only 8,000 people humans on the planet all these different things and here we are with zoom meetings etc etc it's like the strangest story you can ever it's beyond science fiction but nobody thinks about it nobody sits down and goes God I'm alive if you went back to the chain of people that had to connect and have children leading up to your parents the unlikeliness of you ever being born is astronomical I mean unless my science is all wrong you know 70,000 generations of people meeting etc etc finally ending at your DNA I mean unless I'm missing something it's it's pretty unlikely but nobody thinks about it well I certainly think about it now because I almost died I have nothing else to think about that's I have to entertain my brain the way Milton Ericson had to entertain himself by observing people so it's taken a lot away from me I can't swim I'm writing my my recumbent bike which I love and 80-year-old grandmothers are zipping by me and God damn it how awful I'm so envious I'm so my insecurities all well up but then I realize hey I'm I'm like I'm I'm like on a boat I'm sailing it's wonderful I'm outside you know I have to go through these processes but I think it's developed me in some way that's that's in the end very positive sounds like you've had to adjust to a new frame rate on life like that the the old movie had a certain frame rate this movie has a certain frame rate but that within that frame rate there are gifts to be that you certainly missed in your prior version of self is that is that a yeah but also like I tell people this I totally took my life for granted I I was swimming all this time I was fantastic I was bicycling I was traveling but I never sat back and thought wow this is wonderful how grateful it is could be taken away from you I tell people don't do that to yourself I try and teach them it can be taken away from you tomorrow when you're out walking the think of me think of me that can't walk the dog and appreciate those things which I didn't appreciate so I try and help people in that way when I can you know I think uh critical message is also to inspire a sense of urgency in people you know I think people hear a sense of urgency and they go oh God I'm already under so much pressure life's so hard but we're not talking about a sense of urgency to take on more of what life has to offer uh I think we're talking about a sense of urgency to find one's purpose which takes work and is an ongoing process but to really get out of modes of apathy laziness um languishing and to start as you've described it paying deeper attention I mean this is a a concept that was super important for me to hear about and I learned about it from you was how do you get yourself out of a rut you start paying deeper attention to the things around you and inside you and um perhaps not coincidentally you referred to that as quote death ground yeah so um it's what it's a strategy from my book I wrote wrote a book on strategy my version of The Art of War it's called 33 Strategies of War but it's really about strategy the Strategic thinking it's inspired from sunu the great Chinese strategist but it has vast philosophy iCal implications the idea is you can almost think of it like barometric pressure when necessity is pressing in on you like your back is against the wall like you have to get something done and there's like this pressure around you you find energy in there that you never believed before William James talks about this when he talks about getting a second wind he explains it very eloquently when you feel like your life's in danger suddenly you can you can leap over things that you never could leap over before so sunsu says put an Army on death ground and it will fight and until it's it wins meaning put an army with its back to the ocean or a back to the mountain and it's either win or die they're going to fight 10 times harder you're going to find the energy in you that you normally lack when death is facing you in the face or urgency or deadlines or people pressing in on you when that barometric pressure loosens up and there's none of it you think you have all the time in the world you get nothing done wow man I'm 23 I've got all these years ahead of me I'm going to figure it out right I'm not going to die I got 50 70 80 years ahead of me no you don't that pressure now is gone and you're wasting time you're you're you're doing all sorts of things that aren't leading to any kind of skill you're not learning or anything you need to put yourself on death ground you need to feel that barometric pressure which is the actual reality the actual reality is you could die tomorrow you could have a stroke tomorrow you you could be fired tomorrow everything could fall apart you need to have that sense of urgency now because that's the reality you're fooling yourself by thinking you have all of this time and so when you feel that pressure suddenly you can move mountains you you have energy your life you you know you just have Focus Etc neurologically everything Clicks in you know and people who've had that experience where they've where they felt like the the ship was going under and they better get their act together and survive they talk about all these physical processes I have a story in my new book I I hope I'm not boring you here with all no quite the opposite about a mountain climber who um he he he was climbing this mountain by himself and he was having a great time but there was a storm coming and he had to get down and he suddenly fell and he cut his leg open massively and there was like a branch sticking in it and he he broke all these bones and he was he was going to die he was on a Ledge he could see that it was getting dark and and storm clouds were were massing there was going to be this was in the Rocky Mountains he was alone and suddenly he met managed to get up on his two feet and he can't explain how but all of this energy all this adrenaline started flowing in him and he said he was like a mountain goat he was like going down the ledge he he jumped he was able to kind of get down to another ledge he he got it he got out of it and for the for the next 20 years he was haunted by how did that happen I want that feeling again because it was actually the most ecstatic feeling I had energy that I never suspected in myself and so he tries everything to get that feeling back he tries climbing other mounts he tries going to to Mount Everest he tries and it doesn't come back and finally he kind of figures out the formula for it and why it happened he studies a lot of Neuroscience it's a great book I'm using it in my new book it's called bone bone games it's very interesting book a lot of Science in it um and he got the feeling back in a smaller sense but it was the feeling of your life is in danger I better get my act together or it's the end and suddenly adrenaline dopamine all the other things were occurring in him and he got and and he found that energy so um that's that's the ultimate kind of death ground right there the human will to live is truly incredible and so now I have to say as I said before I'm so grateful that your stroke didn't take you out because clearly there's still so much in there and you're continuing to share uh what is really exquisitly useful knowledge oh thank you it's just it's just kind of astonishing to me I started off today's discussion expressing my gratitude for what you've already done for my life and for the lives of so many other people through your books you know it's clear you've been on a a for foraging exploration and that foraging for organizing and communicating information mainly in the form of written books but also online content you have a terrific YouTube channel which I subscribe to and follow and um and listen to um with wrapped attention uh and the other venues with which you share information including this one today are really truly valuable and appreciated so I I want to say on behalf of myself and um for those that have known you in your work for a number of years but also for the many people that are now sure to um know who you are and what you're about that it's just so clear that like this stuff comes from the heart and that it whatever early seed planted this you know um that we're all grateful for and better off as a consequence of that that seed so uh I could make this list very very long with the the number of specific ways in which you've um improved the journey through life and made it clearer I mean you know life is certainly can be hard but it also can be really confusing and I feel that the the Robert Green uh road map even though it's but one road map is an extremely valuable map to have and to use certainly has been for me so um just an enormous thank you Robert thanks for sharing today and thanks for all you do and all that you're still doing and sure to do in the future oh thank you I I wish I could find the word for explaining the kind of weird emotions that I'm feeling when I hear that there isn't maybe Yiddish maybe if for CLT or something I don't know but thank you yeah well we'll have to have you back here again uh when your next book comes out um can't wait but we will wait okay yeah hopefully I'm still around I I I'm confident you will be okay okay good thank you come back thanks very much I hope I will thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Robert Green I hope you found conversation to be as stimulating as I did if you're learning from and are enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc costway to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a festar review please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests or topics that you'd like me to consider for the hubman Lab podcast please please put those in the comment section on YouTube I do read all the comments not on today's episode but on many previous episodes of The hubman Lab podcast we discuss supplements while supplements aren't necessary for everybody many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like improving sleep for hormone support and for Focus to see the supplements discussed on the huberman Lab podcast you can go to live momentus spelled o us so that's Liv mous.com huberman if you're not already following me on social media I am huberman lab on all social media platforms forms so that's Instagram X threads LinkedIn and Facebook and on all those platforms I discuss science and science related tools some of which overlaps with the content of the huberman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the content on the hubman Lab podcast again it's huberman lab on all social media platforms if you haven't already subscribed to our monthly neural network newsletter the neural network newsletter is a zeroc cost monthly newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as toolkits the toolkits are brief PDFs that you can download give you tools for things like neuroplasticity and learning for managing dopamine for enhancing sleep for physical performance flexibility deliberate cold exposure and on and on to join the neural network newsletter you simply go to huberman lab.com go to the menu tab scroll down to newsletter and enter your email we do not share your email with anybody thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Robert Green and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 165 ---
Video ID: xTtM2AvCRyA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xTtM2AvCRyA
Title: AMA #13: Winter Months & Sickness, Wim Hof Breathing & Stressors
Published: 2023-11-30 13:00:52 UTC
Description:
Welcome to a preview of the 13th Ask Me Anything (AMA) episode, part of Huberman Lab Premium.

Huberman Lab Premium was launched for two main reasons. First, it was launched in order to raise support for the main Huberman Lab podcast  — which will continue to come out every Monday at zero-cost. Second, it was launched as a means to raise funds for important scientific research. A significant portion of proceeds from the Huberman Lab Premium subscription will fund human research (not animal models) selected by Dr. Huberman, with a dollar-for-dollar match from the Tiny Foundation. 

If you're an existing Premium member, you can log in to access the full episode at https://hubermanlab.supercast.com. 

If you're not a member, you can join Huberman Lab Premium at https://www.hubermanlab.com/premium to enjoy exclusive content, including monthly Ask Me Anything (AMA) episodes, AMA transcripts, podcast episode transcripts, early access to live events and help advance human scientific research.

Timestamps
00:00:00 Introduction
00:01:46 Does Cold Weather Make You Sick?
00:21:58 Huberman Lab Premium

In the full AMA episode, we discuss:
- Wim Hof Breathing and Sickness

Articles
Association of oral breathing with dental malocclusions and general health in children: https://bit.ly/3N6tqef

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

#HubermanLab #Science #AMA

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

The Huberman Lab podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Transcript Language: English
ANDREW HUBERMAN: Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [MUSIC PLAYING] I'm Andrew Huberman. And I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today is an Ask Me Anything episode or AMA. This is part of our premium subscriber channel. Our premium subscriber channel was started in order to provide support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast, which comes out every Monday, and is available at 0 cost to everybody on all standard feeds-- YouTube, Apple, Spotify, and elsewhere. We also started the premium channel as a way to generate support for exciting research being done at Stanford and elsewhere. Research on human beings that leads to important discoveries that assist mental health, physical health, and performance. I'm also pleased to inform you that for every dollar the Huberman Lab Premium channel generates for research studies, the Tiny Foundation has agreed to match that amount so now we are able to double the total amount of funding given to studies of mental health, physical health, and human performance. If you'd like to subscribe to the Huberman Lab podcast premium channel, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium. It is $10 a month to subscribe or you can pay $100 all at once to get an entire 12 month subscription for a year. We also have a lifetime subscription model that is a one time payment. And again, you can find that option at hubermanlab.com/premium. For those of you that are already subscribers to the premium channel, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium and download the premium subscription feed. And for those of you that are not Huberman Lab podcast premium subscribers, you can still hear the first 20 minutes of today's episode and determine whether or not becoming a premium subscriber is for you. So without further ado, let's get to answering your questions. The first question is about colds and flus. And the question specifically is, why is it that we get more colds and flus in the winter months? Is it the temperature outside? Is it the fact that people are spending more time indoors? Or is it a myth that we get more colds and flus in the winter months? Well, the first thing is that the research very clearly shows that in winter months there is a greater prevalence of colds and flus. Now, of course, the words, "in the winter months" means many things. For instance, in most areas of the world unless you live directly near the equator, in the winter months means that days are going to be shorter and nights are longer than in the summer months. In general, that's true. It's of course, especially true if you live very far from the equator. So imagine somebody living up in Tromsø, Norway, which is very close to the North Pole. In winter, days are very, very short in Tromsø. And conversely in the summer months, days are very, very long in Tromsø Norway. Now, Tromsø Norway represents an extreme of day length variation according to time of year. The closer you get to the equator, the less variation there is in day length and therefore night length across the year. However, in most locations on Earth, days will be significantly shorter by about an hour or two at least for certain parts of the year. And in general, shorter days correlate with colder temperatures. That's what's really important to know, which is that shorter days generally correlate with colder temperatures regardless of where you live on the planet Earth. OK. So in the winter months as we're calling it, involves at least two things, shorter days, which means what? It means less sunlight and either more artificial light or more darkness depending on how much artificial light you rely on. It also means, as we mentioned, colder temperatures. Colder temperatures, of course, doesn't necessarily mean that you are exposed to those colder temperatures because what's the third thing? Shorter days and colder temperatures outside mean that people are spending more time indoors. So what the research clearly shows is that one of the reasons, not the only, but one of the reasons for the greater prevalence of colds and flus in the short days a.k.a. winter months of the year is that people are spending more time indoors and therefore at closer proximity, which raises a whole bunch of really interesting questions that have been explored in the peer reviewed research about proximity cold and flu transmission. There have been studies for instance where people come into the laboratory who are suffering from cold and flu and are sneezing, having them sneeze at different proximity to other people, obviously people are doing this under consent. They're agreeing to participate in these particular experiments. And there does seem to be a very nice relationship between physical distance between you, the uninfected person, and the sneezing, coughing, nose wiping, eye wiping, we'll get into why I mentioned all of those things in a moment, person that is suffering from the flu. In other words, the closer you are to somebody who's sneezing or coughing, the higher probability that you will contract that cold or flu. OK. So we've already established two things. First of all, physical proximity is a key variable in terms of transmission of cold and flu. And at some level that's a duh. I mean, if you think about it, if you're in the next room or down the hallway from or across the street from somebody with a cold or flu, you don't expect to contract that cold or flu from them. Whereas if you're in the same vehicle with them or you're sitting next to them on an airplane or you are on the same bus or in the same classroom as them and they are sneezing and coughing, well, then, the probability that you would get that cold or flu from them is increased. That's just obvious. But the studies that have explored the relationship between physical proximity and transmission of cold and flu have actually analyzed things down to the range of well, if you're standing one foot apart or you're standing three feet apart or six feet apart, what's the probability that you will contract that cold or flu? And it follows a very direct relationship where the closer the proximity, the more likely that you're going to contract the cold or flu from that person. And of course, anything like exchange of skin contact or exchange of saliva because obviously in cases of romantic relationships where people will kiss or in familial relationships or friendships where people hug, any contact also further increases the transmission of cold and flu. Not just from stuff emitted from the nasal passages and from the mouth when people sneeze and cough, but also when people wipe their eyes, even when people wipe their skin because oftentimes they have cold or flu virus on their skin. It doesn't always survive terribly long on the skin. But if they wipe their face or wipe their nose or are using tissues and then don't wash their hands thoroughly afterwards, indeed they can transmit cold and flu simply through handshake. OK. So for all you hypochondriacs out there, I'm arming you with a lot of useful knowledge that will justify staying away from people who perhaps have cold and flu. Now, this particular point about proximity and people being indoors more during the winter months, and that's why there's more cold and flu transmission, raises a whole bunch of interesting questions, and, in fact, protocols that I plan to cover in a Huberman Lab podcast episode solely devoted to colds and flus and how to avoid getting colds and flus. But one brief mention or telegraph of what I plan to cover in that episode is that if people are telling you that they are sneezing and coughing due to a cold or flu but that they are quote unquote "not contagious" either because they are early in the cold or flu or late in the cold or flu and they have these theories or claims that oh, I'm no longer contagious. Keep in mind that any time someone is sneezing or coughing they are in fact contagious. So I'll get back to that in that full length episode about colds and flus. But I felt it was too important not to mention right now that people's theories about when they are quote unquote "contagious" or "not contagious" are rarely substantiated by the actual data. The actual data point to the fact that when people are sneezing and coughing, if it's due to a cold or flu, they are still contagious. OK. So we've established that cold outside means people tend to be indoors more which increases physical proximity, which is one of the reasons why there's more cold and flu transmission. One of the other reasons why being indoors more tends to increase cold and flu transmission is that in the cold months of winter when people are indoors, they tend to be not under air conditioning, not at neutral temperatures, but rather they tend to be in heated rooms. And depending on the type of heating that's used, but in general, due to all forms of heating, the heated air tends to be drier air. Now, this is a little bit counterintuitive because if you ever go outside on a really cold winter day, you will realize that the cold weather outdoors is extremely dry. You can almost quote unquote "feel the dryness of the air." And if you can't quote unquote "feel the dryness of the air" or imagine what that's like just imagine this, think of yourself outdoors on a very cold winter day taking a brisk walk. Then think about yourself taking that same brisk walk on a very humid summer day. Humidity is, of course, the concentration of water in the ambient environment, the air, whereas the dryness is the lack of humidity. And just that little simple GedankenNet or thought experiment will remind you just how dry the cold air is out of doors during the winter months. Whereas indoors we're heating that air and indeed the heating of that air does have the property of drying the nasal and oral passages but especially the nasal passages. So another key reason why there's more transmission of colds and flus in the winter months is because people are spending more time indoors. And oftentimes the way those indoor environments are being heated is drying out the nasal passages. And the nasal passages represent a primary site of defense for viral infections like colds and flus but also bacterial infections and fungal infections for that matter. Now, I've talked before on this podcast about the importance of using nasal breathing under any conditions where you don't have to breathe through your mouth. So if you are not eating, if you're not speaking, or if you're not exercising hard which by the way oftentimes requires that you breathe through your mouth. There's nothing wrong with breathing through your mouth if you're exercising hard and you need to breathe through your mouth in order to bring in enough oxygen. There are conditions under which that's entirely appropriate. You can learn more about that in the podcast episode I did all about breathing and breath work. But for the most part it's best to be a nasal breather except under the conditions I just mentioned. Why? Well, the nasal passages contain a number of physical barriers, including the hairs within your nose. I know that hairs in the nose, especially if they are super numerous are not considered aesthetically nice. People will trim them, et cetera. But those hairs in your nose actually serve as a barrier toward infection. This is well established. The lining of the nose, the mucosal lining of the nose contains a lot of things. First of all, it acts as its own physical barrier and physical trap for incoming viruses, fungal infections, and bacterial infections. They literally get trapped in the nasal passages. And therefore can't enter deeper into your physiology. And right now is not the time to go into the whole anatomy and physiology of the nasal passages. But keep in mind if you saw the episode that I did with Noam Sobel or you listen to the episode that I did on olfaction, both of those episodes highlight the fact that your brain sits not far behind your nasal passages. There's a bony barrier there called the cribriform plate, and there are some other things as well, but it's not far from your nostrils to your brain. And it is not far from your nostrils to the rest of your respiratory pathway, of course. And so the hairs of your nostrils, the mucus itself, and the microbiome, the trillions of little micro bacteria that thrive in the mucosal lining of your nasal passages actually serve to protect against many of the incoming infections. This is why it's so important to keep the mucosal lining of your nasal passages thriving and intact. How do you do that? Well, one of the best ways to do that is to make sure that the air that you're breathing is sufficiently humidified. So while there are many different claims out there about how to avoid colds and flus, as long as we're having a discussion about why there are more colds and flus in the winter months because indeed there are, it's worth mentioning that if you suffer from colds and flus and you're going to spend a lot of time in particular indoor environment, you might be wise to find a air humidifier, something that brings more moisture into the air that you're breathing especially at night while you're sleeping. Now, that's not going to prevent the person in your environment who happens to have a cold or flu and is sneezing actively from transmitting that cold or flu. But it will keep your nasal passages and the rest of your respiratory pathways as healthy as they can be and as resistant as they can be to any colds or flues that you might be fighting off. And this is another key point, which is regardless of whether or not it's the winter months or the other months of the year, all day long you're combating different types of infections. Different types of viral, fungal, and bacterial infections are bombarding your system and your immune system counters that both through physical and through neurochemical and hormonal and pure immune mechanisms. OK. There's a whole discussion of this in the episode that I did on the immune system. We'll do more on this. But keeping the air that you breathe especially at night sufficiently humidified is one great way to try and offset colds and flus that you might be combating because you brought that cold or flu home from work and your immune system needs to ward it off. OK. If you are having a hard time grasping how it is that you could bring home a cold or flu and then ward it off, do you have it? Do you not have? It is it sitting there trying to get into your system? Or do you have it a little bit? Well, this is some of the gray area around cold and flu and viral transmission generally. I mean, we don't know, for instance, if you got a mild sniffle as opposed to a really bad cold or flu whether or not it would have been a really bad cold or flu, had you slept less, had you not humidified your air better, et cetera. Probably it would be. And if you've ever not slept well for a little bit and you're sick, you experienced just how much worse that sickness feels. The symptoms of that sickness go from very mild to moderate or from mild to moderate to very severe when you are sleep deprived. That said, it's also clear that some strains of the cold or flu can be more mild than other strains of the cold or flu. So this can be pretty nuanced. And we'll go deeper into this in the episode that I do on cold and flu and how to avoid cold and flu. But nasal breathing whenever possible day and night time is extremely important for encouraging the overall health and resistance of your respiratory pathways to incoming cold and flu and other types of viruses. Similarly, humidifying the air that you breathe especially at night but perhaps also during the day in your OFS environment or home environment can also be very beneficial for warding off colds and flus. And if you'd like to read more about the nasal versus mouth breathing components of colds or flus, I'll just mention one paper now and again, I'll go into this in more depth in the future episode on colds and flus. But I want to mention that this is a bidirectional effect, meaning people who deliberately breathe through their nose tend to get fewer colds and flus. Also people who tend to breathe through their mouth more tend to get more colds and flus. Now, you might think that's the same thing or just two sides of the same coin. But actually it's not. There's what we call a double dissociation whereby if people are mouth breathers, they are far more susceptible to colds and flus and other types of respiratory illnesses. I'll put a link to one particular paper that I like a lot in the show note captions entitled association of oral breathing with dental malocclusions and general health in children. This paper explores a lot of different things about nasal versus mouth breathing all of which, by the way point to the fact that nasal breathing whenever possible is better for us health wise, aesthetically, dental health wise than is mouth breathing. But one of the key components here and this is why I bring it up in the context of this discussion is quote "oral breathing is related to a significantly higher prevalence of allergies and a significantly more likely getting sick and taking medication for being sick." OK. So lots in this study, lots in related studies. But nonetheless, being a nasal breather, humidifying your air, paying attention to whether or not you're indoors with people who are coughing and sneezing because it's cold outside, all of those things are going to be relevant perhaps keeping a little bit of distance, maybe a lot of distance from those people or encouraging them to wash their hands after they wipe their nose. Maybe even sending them to a little bit of not necessarily isolation although that might be necessary but keeping them at a distance. I don't think it's too much to ask somebody who's sick to not get you sick. Personally I think that's the polite thing to try and do. And there's actually not many things ruder than someone who knows that they're sick showing up to something because they didn't want to miss that particular event and getting everybody else sick frankly, that's my opinion. I think that opinion is shared with many of you out there as well. Now, as I mentioned earlier, when it's cold outside, the air tends to be drier. Not always. I mean, you could live in an environment that's very cold and very rainy, obviously very rainy is very humid. It's maximum humidity if you think about it. But if you are going to spend time out of doors in cold days of winter, which by the way, is a really good thing for other reasons, I'll get into those reasons in a moment because they relate directly to why there's such a prevalence of colds and flus because in general, people are not doing what I'm about to tell you to do. But there are two things to keep in mind if you're going to be out of doors. First of all, the things about proximity still hold. There have been studies of people who have colds and flus sneezing in indoor environments versus outdoor environments and how much transmission there is. Again, it boils down to proximity. Yes, you can get a cold or flu from somebody sneezing out of doors next to you just as well as you can if they sneeze next to you indoors There's a slightly higher probability that you'll get it from them if they're sneezing at that same distance but you're indoors as opposed to outdoors obviously sneezers, coughers-- sneeze and cough in the other direction, cover your mouth and nose. If you don't have a tissue or something, we are told and I subscribe to the idea that sneezing into your elbow or coughing into your elbow is probably the next best thing to not covering up at all, as opposed to into your hand, which then you touch other things and yourself. Anyway, without getting into the mechanics of sneezing and coughing too deeply, if you're going to be outside in the cold winter months and you'd like to avoid getting colds and flus, when you run, when you exercise, when you walk, when you're in conversation, try to nasal breathe unless you have to mouth breathe. And if you can sense your nasal passages or your mouth drying out because of that hard breathing, and by the way exercise during the winter months is still important. So I'm not discouraging people from exercising outdoors during the winter months as long as you can do it safely. But if you feel those air passages drying out, just be aware that when you take those dried out air passages in doors and you're around other people that might have colds and flus, you are going to be more susceptible. So that's cause for taking a hot shower, perhaps if you have access to a steam room or humidifier, and rehydrating those nasal and oral passages. Now, if you're outside and running and you're breathing hard and your nasal passages are drying out, does that mean that you're more susceptible to colds and flus that are just out in that environment if no one else is around? Chances are no. However, what we were all told when we were kids which is if you go outside and you get a chill, it's a good idea when you come back inside to take a hot shower or a hot bath or if you have access to it a sauna to heat back up. That's also true, why? Well, it does seem that there's a relationship between core body temperature and susceptibility to cold and flu. And this is something I'm going to go deeply into in the episode on colds and flus. Keep in mind that fevers that are the response to exposure to a cold or flu or being full blown sick with a cold and flu are an attempt of your immune system to heat up that virus and destroy it. Keep that in mind if you're considering taking any medication to lower your fever, of course, know that highly elevated body temperatures a.k.a. fever can be very dangerous to the brain and body. There's a fairly limited upper range of temperatures that we can go into before we start damaging ourselves. But also keep in mind that fever is an adaptation designed to destroy viruses. So if you blunt the fever, you are actually letting a cold or virus to proliferate more readily than it would if you allowed a slight fever to combat that. OK. So there's a whole discussion to be had there because obviously you don't want people cooking their brains due to elevated fever and not treating that fever. But you also don't want to reduce your core body temperature too much which raises the question of things like cold plunges. Should you be taking cold showers and doing cold plunges in the winter months when it's already cold and you're susceptible to colds and maybe you're coming down with a cold, should you do that? Well, that segues into the next question that I'm going to answer for this AMA, which relates directly to cold exposure and so-called cyclic hyperventilation breathing sometimes associated with so-called Wim Hof breathing but other forms of deliberate breathing as well. And how specific forms of deliberate breathing and how deliberate cold exposure can indeed be used to offset or even prevent entirely infection due to bacterial or viruses. But if you're already coming down with a bacterial or viral infection, why cyclic hyperventilation breathing or why deliberate cold exposure may actually be the worst thing if you are already contracting or have contracted, if you are contracting or have already contracted a cold or virus. So we'll answer that question next. In the meantime, just know that yes, indeed in the winter months you are more susceptible to colds and flus because there's more of them going around. We talked about some of the reasons why they're going around, and some of the things you can do to protect yourself against those colds and flus. There are a bunch of other things that you can do that are very valuable that will explore in the full length episode on colds and flus and how to avoid getting them. And I'm hoping you all stay clear of colds and flus these winter months. And now you have some tools to try and reduce the duration and severity of those colds and flus should you get one. Thank you for joining for the beginning of this Ask Me Anything episode. To hear the full episode and to hear future episodes of these Ask Me Anything sessions plus to receive transcripts of them and transcripts of the Huberman Lab podcast standard channel and premium tools not released anywhere else, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium. Just to remind you why we launched the Huberman Lab podcast premium channel it's really twofold. First of all, it's to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast channel, which, of course, will still be continued to be released every Monday in full length. We are not going to change the format or anything about the standard Huberman Lab podcast and to fund research. In particular research done on human beings so not animal models but on human beings, which I think we all agree is a species that we are most interested in. And we are going to specifically fund research that is aimed toward developing further protocols for mental health, physical health, and performance. And those protocols will be distributed through all channels, not just the premium channel but through all channels, Huberman Lab podcast and other media channels. So the idea here is to give you information to your burning questions in depth and allow you the opportunity to support the research that provides those answers in the first place. Now, an especially exciting feature of the premium channel is that the Tiny Foundation has generously offered to do dollar for dollar match on all funds raised for research through the premium channel. So this is a terrific way that they're going to amplify whatever funds come in through the premium channel to further support research for science and science related tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. If you'd like to sign up for the Huberman Lab Premium channel, again, there's a cost of $10 per month or you can pay $100 up front for the entire year. That will give you access to all the AMAs. You can ask questions and get answers to your questions. And you'll, of course, get answers to all the questions that other people ask as well. There will also be some premium content such as transcripts of the AMAs and various transcripts and protocols of Huberman Lab podcast episodes not found elsewhere. And again, you'll be supporting research for mental health, physical health, and performance. You can sign up for the premium channel by going to hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. And as always, thank you for your interest in science. [MUSIC PLAYING]

========================================

--- Video 166 ---
Video ID: wG3UFHR1o48
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wG3UFHR1o48
Title: How to Stop Hiccups Using a Science-Supported Tool
Published: 2023-11-27 23:29:57 UTC
Description:
Dubbed by ElevenLabs

In this excerpt from the Huberman Lab episode "How to Breathe Correctly for Optimal Health, Mood, Learning & Performance," I explain how to stop hiccups using a science-supported tool. Hiccups are caused by spasming of the phrenic nerve to diaphragm connection. Based on the way the phrenic nerve controls the diaphragm, you can stop that spasm by inhaling three times in a row with no exhales in between, then holding your breath for 15 to 30 seconds, and then slowly exhaling. 

Done correctly, this should eliminate hiccups the first time and every time, but if it's a severe spasm, you may have to repeat it a few times. All the other purported methods out there, such as drinking a glass of water backward, upside down, or scaring someone, etc., are all designed to adjust the pattern of diaphragmatic control by the brain. The technique described here actually does that.

The Huberman Lab podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Transcript Language: English
Everybody experiences hiccups from time to time. I think most people would agree that one hiccup is sort of funny, two hiccups in a row is really funny and three hiccups in a row is where it starts to be concerning, in part because hiccups can be kind of painful. There is a technique that can reliably eliminate hiccups and it's a technique that takes advantage of hypercontracting the phrenic nerve over a short period of time so that it then subsequently relaxes or alleviates the spasming of the phrenic nerve. And that simple method is to inhale three times in a row. This is a very unusual pattern of breathing but what it involves is taking a big deep inhale through your nose, then before you exhale any air, take a second inhale through the nose, however brief that inhale might be, and then a third even micro or millisecond long inhale through your nose to get that third inhale and then hold your breath for about 15 to 20 seconds and then slowly exhale.

========================================

--- Video 167 ---
Video ID: 3gtvNYa3Nd8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3gtvNYa3Nd8
Title: Dr. Adam Grant: How to Unlock Your Potential, Motivation & Unique Abilities
Published: 2023-11-27 13:00:03 UTC
Description:
In this episode, my guest is Dr. Adam Grant, Ph.D., a professor of organizational psychology at The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, an expert in the science and practical steps for increasing motivation, maximizing and reaching our potential, and understanding how individuals and groups can best flourish. He is also an avid public educator, having written five bestselling books, delivered several top-ranking TED Talks and is the host of two psychology podcasts. We discuss how to overcome procrastination, how to increase intrinsic motivation (even for dreaded tasks), identify blind spots and rethink our assumptions, and how we can build a persistent growth mindset. We also explain tools to improve creativity and discuss the surprising relationship between creativity and procrastination. We then explore how to effectively solicit useful feedback and grow from constructive criticism and how you can improve your level of focus and attention using science-supported methods. We also discuss mental tools to get out of negative thought spirals, how to nurture potential in yourself or others, and the dark side of perfectionism. The discussion delivers more than a dozen science-supported protocols that are readily applicable to anyone seeking to live a more productive, fulfilling, and creative life.

For the show notes, including referenced articles and additional resources, please visit https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/dr-adam-grant-how-to-unlock-your-potential-motivation-unique-abilities

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman 
Levels: https://levels.link/huberman
Waking Up: https://www.wakingup.com/huberman
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman
Momentous: https://livemomentous.com/huberman 

Huberman Lab Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

Dr. Adam Grant
Website: https://adamgrant.net 
Books: https://adamgrant.net/books
Podcasts: https://adamgrant.net/podcasts
Academic profile: https://mgmt.wharton.upenn.edu/profile/grantad
TED Talk: “Are You a Giver or a Taker?”: https://www.ted.com/talks/adam_grant_are_you_a_giver_or_a_taker 
TED Talk: “ The Surprising Habits of Original Thinkers”: https://www.ted.com/talks/adam_grant_the_surprising_habits_of_original_thinkers 
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/adamgrant 
X: https://twitter.com/adammgrant 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/AdamMGrant 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/adammgrant 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@adamgrant 

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Adam Grant
00:01:37 Sponsors: Eight Sleep, Levels & Waking Up
00:05:56 Procrastination & Emotion; Curiosity
00:14:06 Creativity & Procrastination; Motivation
00:20:48 Intrinsic Motivation & Curiosity
00:27:59 Tool: Tasks & Sense of Purpose
00:30:52 Sponsor: AG1
00:32:34 Extrinsic Rewards, Choice; Social Media
00:42:24 Tool: “Quiet Time” Protocol, Chronotypes
00:49:20 Tool: Creativity: Mornings, Movement, Stillness
00:57:05 Sponsor: InsideTracker
00:58:14 Tools: Ideas & Filtering, Feedback & Opinions, Advice
01:07:15 Tool: Constructive Criticism, “Second Score”; Verbs
01:14:40 Tool: Growth Mindsets, Scaffolding; Job Innovation
01:21:50 Tools: Task Sequencing & Intrinsic Motivation; Tapering & Frame of Reference
01:30:03 Tools: Momentum, Confidence & Domains; Negative Thought Spirals
01:36:16 Tool: Phone & “To Don’t” List; Writing Ideas
01:39:54 Tool: Bias Blindspot, Reflected Best-Self Portrait
01:45:36 Helping Others, Synthesizing Information
01:50:24 Modes of Thinking, Blind Spots & Assumptions
01:56:10 Thinking Like a Scientist: Hypothesis-Testing & Discourse, Social Media
02:05:15 Tool: Authenticity, Sincerity & Etiquette, “Snapshot” & Online Presence
02:12:49 Realizing Potential: Motivation, Opportunity & Process
02:21:53 Skills to Realize Potential, Perfectionism
02:27:52 Tool: Early Success & Performance Cycle, “Failure Budget”
02:31:56 Future Projects, Complex Issues & Challenging Ideas
02:40:10 Artistic Hobbies, Magicians
02:45:55 Science Communication, Interest & Self-Relevance
02:52:16 Languishing, Descriptive Language & Emotions
03:00:09 Tool: Nurture Potential in Children, “Coach Effect”
03:10:16 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, YouTube Feedback, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

#HubermanLab #AdamGrant #Science

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 168 ---
Video ID: wAZn9dF3XTo
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wAZn9dF3XTo
Title: A Science-Supported Journaling Protocol to Improve Mental & Physical Health
Published: 2023-11-20 13:00:58 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I explain a specific writing protocol shown in hundreds of scientific studies to significantly improve immediate and long-term health. I explain how to implement this specific protocol, which takes only four days and 15-30 minutes per day. I also explain the mechanism for how the four-day writing protocol affects neuroplasticity (brain rewiring) and brain function in the short and long term. I explain how these brain changes positively impact our physical health, including our system's immune function and thus our ability to combat infections, improve sleep, reduce feelings of physical and emotional pain, lower anxiety, and bring about healing from traumas. This episode ought to be of interest to anyone seeking better mental and/or physical health through the use of brief yet highly effective science-supported protocols.

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman 
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman 
Waking Up: https://wakingup.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman 
Momentous: https://livemomentous.com/huberman 

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

Articles
Confronting a traumatic event: toward an understanding of inhibition and disease: https://bit.ly/3QMlLD1
Natural emotion vocabularies as windows on distress and well-being: https://go.nature.com/3QKtYHB
Disclosure of traumas and immune function: Health implications for psychotherapy: https://bit.ly/3R6y65d
Putting Feelings Into Words: https://bit.ly/3G4T2nQ
Increasing honesty in humans with noninvasive brain stimulation: https://bit.ly/47jAmgh
The β1-adrenergic receptor links sympathetic nerves to T cell exhaustion: https://go.nature.com/3MPKXr5
Writing About Emotional Experiences as a Therapeutic Process: https://bit.ly/3rOVn2B
Brain and body are more intertwined than we knew: https://go.nature.com/3MMSXcj
Therapeutic Journaling: https://bit.ly/3upAImX

Books
Opening Up by Writing It Down: How Expressive Writing Improves Health and Eases Emotional Pain: https://amzn.to/47FDnaK
Trauma: The Invisible Epidemic: How Trauma Works and How We Can Heal From It: https://amzn.to/47HrNMg

Other Resources
Dr. James Pennebaker: https://bit.ly/47CZ7ng 
Dr. Paul Conti: Therapy, Treating Trauma & Other Life Challenges (Huberman Lab episode): https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/dr-paul-conti-therapy-treating-trauma-and-other-life-challenges 
Guest Series | Dr. Paul Conti: How to Understand & Assess Your Mental Health (Huberman Lab episode): https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/guest-series-dr-paul-conti-how-to-understand-and-assess-your-mental-health 
Science of Social Bonding in Family, Friendship & Romantic Love (Huberman Lab episode): https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/science-of-social-bonding-in-family-friendship-and-romantic-love 
Using Your Nervous System to Enhance Your Immune System (Huberman Lab episode): https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/using-your-nervous-system-to-enhance-your-immune-system 
Tools for Managing Stress & Anxiety (Huberman Lab episode): https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/tools-for-managing-stress-and-anxiety 

Timestamps
00:00:00 Journaling Protocol for Mental & Physical Health
00:03:06 Sponsors: LMNT, Eight Sleep & Waking Up
00:07:16 Journaling & Confronting Traumatic Events
00:11:25 Tool: Expressive Writing
00:14:38 Morning Notes, Gratitude Journaling, Diary Journaling
00:18:00 Tool: Consecutive Writing Bouts; Trauma Definition
00:24:38 Low Expressors vs. High Expressors
00:29:29 Tools: Language, Vocabulary & Emotion; Analyzing Writing
00:35:02 Tool: Writing Session Tips
00:39:31 Sponsor: AG1
00:41:02 Positive Mental & Physical Benefits
00:46:45 Expressive Writing & Immune Function; Brain-Body Connection 
00:57:02 Sponsor: InsideTracker
00:58:10 Neuroplasticity, Prefrontal Cortex & Subcortical Structures
01:05:00 Structured Writing, Trauma & Narratives; Truth-Telling
01:08:56 Neuroplasticity, Truth-Telling & Relief from Trauma
01:15:32 Honesty, Brain Activity & Narratives
01:22:01 Overcoming Trauma & the Brain; Stress, Emotions & Honesty
01:26:41 Expressive Writing Protocol & Benefits
01:36:16 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, YouTube Feedback, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

#HubermanLab #Science #Journaling

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford school of medicine today we are discussing journaling for mental and physical health I want to emphasize that today's discussion is not a general discussion about the value of journaling rather it is a discussion about a particular form of journaling that the scientific peerreview data says is especially powerful for improving our mental and physical health in fact what I will describe today is a journaling method that is supported by over 200 peer-reviewed studies in quality journals and I frankly was not aware of this journaling practice prior to researching this episode but in researching this episode have come to discover that this practice should easily be placed among some of the other critical so-called foundational pillar practices in terms of its impact on improving mental and physical health including things like lowering anxiety improving sleep improving immunity to things like colds flu Etc as well as reducing the symptoms of autoimmune disorders such as arthritis lupus and also providing some relief for fibromyalgia which is a condition of excessive pain the particular journaling method and protocol that I will describe has also been shown to improve various metric Tri of everyday living including improved memory decision- making and on and on and on so much so that again I was very surprised that I had not heard of this particular journaling method one would think that if such a powerful method existed that everyone would know about it but it turns out that this particular journaling method has been somewhat cloistered within the fields of psychology and Psychiatry it's not that nobody was aware of it in fact I learned about it for the first time from our associate chair of Psychiatry at Stanford for University School of Medicine my colleague and collaborator Dr David Spiegel who as some of you may know has been featured as a guest on this podcast previously and upon hearing about it I decided to explore the primary research that is the studies that demonstrate the power of this particular journaling method and was absolutely Blown Away by the positive impact this particular journaling method can have what's wonderful about it you'll soon discover is that it takes a relatively small amount of time in fact it's something that you could do during the the course of one week or even across one month and then never do again and the data say that it would still have lasting positive benefits both for body and mind so while it's rare to feature one particular protocol as an entire huberman Lab podcast that is indeed what I will do today it is important that we go into some depth about the specific protocol because there are some important details that everyone should know if they want to apply it and make it as effective as it can be and in addition to that we'll talk about some of the underlying science that that's been published explaining why and how this protocol is so effective for mental and physical health before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is element element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't that means plenty electrolytes sodium magnesium and potassium and no sugar the electrolytes are absolutely essential for the functioning of every cell in your body and your neurons your nerve cells rely on sodium magnesium and potassium in order to communicate with one another electrically and chemically element contains the optimal ratio of electrolytes for the functioning of neurons and the other cells of your body every morning I drink a packet of element dissolved in about 32 ounces of water I do that just for General hydration and to make sure that I have adequate electrolytes for any activities that day I'll often also have an element packet or even two packets in 32 to 60 ounces of water if I'm exercising very hard and certainly if I'm sweating a lot in order to make sure that I replace those electrolytes if you'd like to try element you can go to drink lnt.com huberman to get a free sample pack with your purchase again that's drink lnt.com huberman today's episode is also brought To Us by 8 sleep eight sleep makes Smart mattress covers with cooling Heating and sleep tracking capacity I've spoken many times before in this podcast about the fact that getting a great night's sleep really is the foundation of mental health physical health and performance one of the key things to getting a great night's sleep is to make sure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct and that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep your body temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3° and in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized your body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3° with eight sleep you can program the temperature of your sleeping environment in the beginning middle and end of your night it has a number of other features like tracking the amount of rapid eye movement and slow wave sleep that you get things that are essential to really dialing in the perfect night's sleep for you I've been sleeping on an eight Sleep mattress cover for well over two years now and it has greatly improved my sleep I fall asleep far more quickly I wake up far less often in the middle of the night and I wake up feeling far more refreshed than I ever did prior to using an eights Sleep mattress cover if you'd like to try eight sleep go to 8sleep.com huberman now through November 30th as a special holiday discount eight sleep is offering $500 off their bundles with a pod cover eight sleep currently ships in the USA Canada the UK select countries in the EU and Australia again that's 8sleep.com huberman today's episode is also brought To Us by waking up waking up is a meditation app that includes hundreds of meditation programs mindfulness trainings yoga NRA sessions and nsdr nonsleep deep rest protocols I started using the waking up app a few years ago because even though I've been doing regular meditation since my teens and I started doing Yoga Nidra about a decade ago my dad mentioned to me that he had found an app turned out to be the waking up app which could teach you meditations of different durations and that had a lot of different types of meditations to place the brain and body into different states and that he liked it very much so I gave the waking up app a try and I too found it to be extremely useful because sometimes I only have a few minutes to meditate other times I have longer to meditate and indeed I love the fact that can explore different types of meditation to bring about different levels of understanding about Consciousness but also to place my brain and body into lots of different kinds of States depending on which meditation I do I also love that the waking up app has lots of different types of Yoga Nidra sessions for those of you who don't know Yoga Nidra is a process of lying very still but keeping an active mind it's very different than most meditations and there's excellent scientific data to show that yoganidra and something similar to it called non-sleep deep rest or nsdr can greatly restore levels of cognitive and physical energy even with just a short 10-minute session if you'd like to try the waking up app you can go to waking up.com huberman and access a free 30-day trial again that's waking up.com huberman to access a free 30-day trial okay let's talk about this particularly transformative form of journaling that initially was researched by Dr James pennebaker James pennebaker was a professor of psychology at Southern Methodist University when he first started researching this form of journaling and its positive impacts on the body and mind but he has since moved to the University of Texas Austin where he still runs a laboratory and has continued his studies on the role of journaling and other forms of language both spoken and written in terms of their impact on one's mental and physical health so the origins of the research into this particular form of journaling started in the mid 80s and it was really in 1986 that the first published manuscript about this form of journaling was published now I want to be clear that prior to James penay Baker studying this form of journaling clearly others had used the form of journaling that I'm about to describe however it was pen aaker that really started attaching measurements of the specific types of changes that occurred in people when they did this journaling in a particular way and indeed came up with the precise protocol that we'll talk about today so pennebaker and colleagues and James pennebaker in particular really deserves credit for the discovery of this method as you'll soon learn pennebaker was absolutely meticulous in figuring out exactly how long the method should be carried out what exact forms of change occurred in the body and mind he was careful to explore the method in the context of students as well as in the general population in veterans in elderly in kids and on and on so it's really that incredible attention to detail and that scientific rigor that makes the protocol so incredibly powerful so that first scientific study of this particular form of journaling as I mentioned was published in 1986 and I provided a link to that study in the show note captions but what that study essentially consisted of was inviting undergraduate students into the university laboratory one at a time and they were to spend 15 to 30 minutes writing about the most difficult even traumatic or possibly non-traumatic but still very difficult experience that they can recall from their entire life the instruction included that they should write for the entire time that is because they were writing by hand in that particular particular experiment that they were to not stop moving their hand for the entire duration of the 15 to 30 minutes and in addition to that that no one besides them the person writing would see what was written at the beginning middle or even after the experiment in fact the students were invited to tear up the paper at the end of the writing exercise if they so chose okay so the first key instruction is that they take a moment to think about what is the most difficult perhaps even traumatic experience of their entire life the second instruction was that they were supposed to write for 15 to 30 minutes and the third instruction was that they were supposed to write for the entire time that it no point would they take a pause Unless somehow emotionally or physically they were unable to keep moving their hand on the paper in fact they were told to not pay attention to Accurate grammar to not pay attention to reread ability they were told in fact that their writing could be replete with spelling errors or grammatical errors that didn't matter what was most important is that they tap into a particularly negatively charge memory of their prior life experience now of course because this was an experiment carried out in a university laboratory there was a quiet place where the students could write undisturbed but since we're taking this particular protocol and we're exporting it to the real world through this podcast so it's important that if you decide to implement this protocol in your own life that you carry out the writing in a place where you will not be disturbed for that entire 15 to 30 minute duration it's also important that you know that even though that first 1986 study was done having students write out these memories by hand with a pen and paper or a pencil and paper there have been many subsequent studies that have explored whether or not the pen and paper was particularly important it turns out it's not the exact same magnitude of positive effects are observed regardless of whether or not people write out their passage of words by hand or type it out on a word processor or any other form of writing now just to make sure that everyone gets the exact same protocol that was provided in that first initial study from pennebaker and colleagues and that has been used really over and over and over again for more than 200 peer-reviewed studies that demonstrate the power of this protocol I'm going to read to you some of the specific instructions from that first study so the subjects were instructed to quote write about something that you are thinking about or worrying about way too much or if you're not thinking about or worrying about something way too much perhaps you've deliberately tried to not think about this series of events or event something that you've been dreaming about at night perhaps in disturbing dreams or something that you feel is affecting your life in an unhealthy way either internally or externally so it could be in your emotional state your inability to calm down when you want to be calm maybe you're ruminating maybe even compulsive thought maybe it's leading to addictive or compulsive or habitual behaviors or perhaps you can identify by a specific trauma or set of traumas that you know are really plaguing your body and mind The Specific Instructions that were given to the subjects in those experiments are The Specific Instructions that I'm going to give to you now should you decide to implement this journaling protocol and those instructions are as follows I want you to write down your deepest emotions and thoughts as they relate to the most upsetting experience in your life really let go and explore your feelings and thoughts about it as you write you might tie this experience to your childhood your relationship with your parents or siblings people you have loved or love now or even your career or schooling how has this experience related to who you have now become who you have been in the past and who you would like to become the instructions then continue to say many people have not had a truly traumatic experience in their lives but everyone has had major conflicts or stressors and you can write about the most dramatic or stressful experience you've ever had okay so those are some of the key instructions that subjects in these experiments were given before they do the exercise and of course they were given a few minutes to think about what they wanted to write but once they selected what they wanted to write they started writing there was a timer going in the background for 15 to 30 minutes and the Reason by the way I keep saying 15 to 30 minutes is that some experiments employed a 30-minute period other experiments employed a 20-minute period others employed a 15minute period turns out there were no major differences between the 15minute and the 30 minute writing blocks in terms of the positive impact that they had on mental and physical health but for some people and their particular experience that they're writing about 15 minutes is simply going to be too brief a time in order to capture the entire experience and as many thoughts and feelings about that experience as one would perhaps put down onto paper or type out if they had a full 30 minutes so you can allow yourself 15 to 30 minutes and feel welcome to stop before the 30 minute period is over over or perhaps you're going to restrict yourself to 15 minutes and you're going to force yourself to get out as much as possible in that time it really doesn't matter or so say the data okay so before I continue to detail the specifics of this writing protocol you've probably already noticed that what I'm describing is a very different form of journaling than say morning notes which is a form of journaling that writers often use in order to quote unquote clear out the Clutter this is a process of sitting down and writing down in stream of consciousness whatever's on your mind for the first 5 to 15 maybe even 30 minutes every morning as a way to sort of clear out your mental processes and get ready for the day perhaps a day of other forms of writing or other activities entirely what I'm describing is also distinctly different from so-called gratitude journaling in fact it's quite the opposite it's not writing about things that you're grateful for necessarily it's writing about things that are extremely unfortunate that happened to you and that you have very charged negative emotions about in addition the form of journaling that we're talking about today is distinctly different from the form of journaling that I and many others have undertaken perhaps not on a daily basis but perhaps on a daily basis where you essentially are writing out the contents of your daily life a so-called diary and I mention that because I think many people do journal and some do so on a consistent basis I would put myself into that category although the last few years I have not been journaling too much I have literally Stacks and stacks of Journal journals dating back to uh the early 90s I brought a few of them along today and no I'm not going to read them to any of you in fact um when I was looking at these last night uh and by the way these are from the late so this is Summer of 1997 so I would have been uh late in my uh undergraduate career this is um fall of 96 1992 uh always done on the same composition notebook at that time and always done by hand um I'm surprised that my handwriting was as legible as it was it's gotten worse over the years I don't know what neural process that reflects but in any event in Reading over these journal entries um it was clear to me that just as I had recalled that each and every one of them was essentially an update about what was happening lately what I was hoping for some challenges you know basically a diary of sorts and um these are kept in the second drawer of the second no I'm just kidding uh the idea for me is also that no one will ever read these besides me it was uh quite an interesting exercise to to go back and and read those and uh yeah there were a few cringe moments but there were also a few moments where I found myself smiling because um in certain ways uh so little has changed between the person I was then and the person I am now and fortunately uh in so many ways certain things have changed between the person I was then and the person I am now now I mention all of that simply because I think the form of journaling that I've been doing for some years the sort of autobiographical approach to daily entries or pseudo daily ENT R is far and a way different than the type of journaling that we're talking about for sake of improving mental and physical health during today's episode which is not to say that gratitude journaling or autobiographical daily entries AK diary type journaling is not useful in fact there are data to support that gratitude journaling in particular can be very beneficial for both body and mind everything from improving General states of Happiness to reducing anxiety improving relationships and and on and on but to get back to the protocol that we're talking about today you probably noticed that it is not a protocol that's likely to feel very good at least not at first and indeed that's what the research shows and this is something that you really need to be aware of that when subjects are given this research assignment during the assignment they are often quite distraught often times they cry often times they find themselves holding their breath and anxiety often times they'll finish that 15 to 30 minute writing block and they'll feel as if they had run a mental marathon and therefore the subjects were given a period of 5 to 15 minutes post- writing to settle down and transition back into their day so I highly recommend that you incorporate that into your protocol as well so if you're going to allow yourself say 20 minutes to write you want to give yourself probably 10 minutes of quiet time to you know bring your composure back and reset yourself so that you can re-enter daily living because the writing that you're going to do for this particular protocol is designed to tap into very negative if not the most negative experiences of your life and so that's something to be taken seriously and it's an entirely unreasonable expectation that you could write about something as difficult as the most difficult experience in your life and then simply pivot and go back into everyday life right away so you'll want to designate a time of day or night perhaps when you can do this writing and still allow yourself some time to you know settle down your autonomic system you know return your breathing to normal perhaps you know wash your face with some cool water remind yourself that the rest of the day continues that you're doing great in fact you made it through this first installment of the journaling exercise so you're probably starting to get the impression that this form of journaling that Penna Baker and colleagues really researched and pioneered the evolution of is quite different than other forms of journaling and in fact it's very different I've already told you that the idea is to sit down and write for 15 to 30 minutes right continuously write about something that really to you is one of the most if not the most difficult experiences of your life in addition to that for this form of journaling to be most effective that is to bring about the greatest positive shifts in mental and physical health you're actually going to write about that exact same thing four times now the way that that was initially researched by penne Baker and others was to have the same person of course write about the same experience four times on four consecutive days for 15 to 30 minutes each so students or people from the general population or veterans were literally coming into the laboratory and sitting down and writing about the most difficult experience of their life that they could recall for 15 to 30 minutes on one day and then again on the next day and then the next day and the next day so much of the data on this particular journaling method reflects that four consecutive days of 15 to 30 minute writing bouts of the most difficult experience that you can recall however there have been variations on this protocol such that people selected one day per week and it doesn't even have to be the same day like every Monday it could be Monday of one week and then Wednesday of the next week and so on such that you write only one day per week about the most difficult experience you can recall and then you write about that same difficult experience one week later and then again one week later and then again one week later across the course of a month or any 4-we period for that matter now I don't know about you but when I hear that that I'm going to need to write about the most difficult experience of my entire life that I can recall for even 15 minutes let alone 30 minutes let alone two times and here we're talking about four times perhaps even on four consecutive days that actually speaks to some intensity some demand in fact I find myself kind of leaning away from that experience a little bit but as we'll talk about later that's exactly the point of this type of exercise which is that we are harboring these stories these experiences and in some cases partial Recollections and in other case detailed Recollections of the difficult thing that happened to us perhaps even the most difficult thing that happened to us and those narratives exist in our nervous system these are not necessarily traumas as we talked about before although they can be traumas now we hear a lot about trauma and these days people call all sorts of things trauma and traumatizing and say that they've been traumatized by this or traumatized by that there's actually a specific definition of trauma that was provided by Dr Paul kti who is some of you know is a medical doctor and psychiatrist he's been a guest on this podcast first to talk about trauma he wrote a excellent book about trauma I provide a link to that book in the show note captions by the way and he and I did four episodes of The hubman Lab podcast a So-Cal guest series specifically aimed at mental health what it is how to build mental health specific protocols and Dr Paul kti is really truly a world expert in trauma and he defines trauma as any experience or experiences plural that modify our brain and neural circuitry so it could be brain or body or both such that we do not function as well emotionally behaviorally or cognitively going forward from that experience okay so not everything constitutes a trauma but many things do so applying that definition I think it's fair to say that many if not most people have some form of trauma stored in their nervous system and other people perhaps don't have such traumas but everyone has had stressors in fact I think it's fair to say that everyone has had major stressors in their life provided that they've lived it all that's just part of life unfortunately or maybe fortunately maybe it makes us who we are in positive ways if we are able to transmute those negative experiences and stressors or traumas into particular forms of learning that allow us to do better and indeed that's possible and that was discussed with Paul kti in that four episode series on Mental Health but the particular form of journaling that we're talking about today was really designed to have people focus on those difficult experiences and then for four episodes total yes total there's no ongoing every week or you know it's not like having to seek out sunlight every morning and getting sunlight in your eyes or trying to get the best possible night sleep at night like I'm always encouraging people to do this is really a short-term protocol but it's one that is indeed very intense okay so along those lines that deliberately journaling about a particularly distressing experience or set of experiences is likely to bring some degree of you know sadness anxiety frustration anger perhaps other emotions as well it's important that you know some some of the data that have been collected about this journaling protocol one of the more important features of this protocol is that when people do it they tend to bin out into two different groups and these two groups have been described as low expressors and high expressors now low expressors and high expressors have nothing to do with introversion and extroversion that's actually been looked at and they have no relationship okay so some people who are very talkative and very extroverted they could be a low expressor somebody who's very introverted tends to only you know share when they really have something to say and maybe doesn't have a lot of interest in social interactions or as some of you who heard the episode on relationships know an actual introvert is somebody who really enjoys social interactions but they are very sated they are very satisfied by less social interaction than our extroverts okay if you want to learn more about that check out the episode I did on relationships but in any event when people sit down to do this exercise and and when they consent to having their writing analyzed and when they undergo a number of other different tests turns out there are two different groups that segment out the first are these low expressors the low expressors tend to use less descriptive language in their writing they tend to get less emotional during the first bout of writing that first day of 15 to 30 minute writing whereas the high expressors tend to be people that use a lot of negative language to describe their negative emotions about the negative experience so that means more negative descriptor words were used at higher frequency these people when they have their physiology measured also tend to have higher amounts of distress and upset in the first bout of writing that first 15 to 30 minute episode so we've got two different groups the low expressors and the high expressors the low expressors on day one are sharing a bit less they're expressing Less on paper of their particular emotions that they can recall from that traumatic or very distressing event and overall based on physiological measures as well so cortisol increases as well as Skin conductance changes in heart rate and blood pressure the lower expressors are effectively relatively more calm less distressed as they write about this very stressful event in their lives relative to the high expressors who have higher blood pressure higher heart rate they tend to be the ones that cry more or hold their breath more or SOB more have higher levels of ctis all during that first round of writing now for the protocol to be effective it doesn't matter if you're in the low expressor or high expressor group here's what's interesting I just mentioned that on day one the low expressors are less distressed physiologically and psychologically as they write about this for them very distressful event whereas the high expressors are much more distressed significantly more so in fact when these are measured in laboratory studies on both mental and physical dimensions of of stress now that's on day one but then what's observed is an opposite pattern of progression such that the low expressors become more and more distressed as the writing exercise continues from day two 3 and four whereas the high expressors these people that use a lot of language to communicate their distress and are experiencing a lot of physiological and emotional distress as they're writing on day one their amount of distress from day 1 to two to 3 to four actually goes down more dramatically so you can expect that you fall into one or the other group this was truly a binary distribution where people bend out into one or the other based on a number of different measurements but here's the good news turns out it doesn't matter whether or not you're a low expressor or a high expressor you want to use the form of writing that's most natural for you and that for you communicates what that negative experience was like and how it has affected you and perhaps how it's affected others as well the important thing to know is that both groups both the low expressors and the high expressors benefit from this journaling protocol such that three weeks later and even three months later and even years later both groups are experiencing far less distress and Baseline levels of stress than they did prior to embarking on the journaling protocol at the very beginning now the reason I mention these two groups the low expressors and the high expressors is that it's a non-trivial detail of this writing protocol because some people are very familiar with communicating their emotions both in writing and perhaps in speech as well and this actually has been looked at uh there's a wonderful study also by penne Baker and colleagues and I should mention that even though he studied these journaling protocol for a good number of years his laboratory has evolved now to studying all sorts of things related to how the particular language usage patterns that people use in everyday speech as well as in their writing how that reflects their underlying psychological tone and emotions but also and I find this so interesting how the particular words that we use in writing and speech actually shape in a causal way our emotional state so I'll talk a little bit about that later but the important thing to focus on now is the results of this study entitled natural emotion vocabularies as Windows on stress and well-being and this again is a study that was done by pen Baker and colleagues I've linked to it in the show note captions and it essentially examines people's natural language usage patterns now what do I mean by natural and why is that important well there have been many many studies of people's vocabulary and assessing whether or not people have more knowledge of negative words to describe negative emotions or positive emotions these studies are varying in their form but generally consist of having people Circle words they recognize or maybe writing out the definitions to and it turns out that people that have more extensive knowledge of words that describe negative emotions themselves tend to have a lower affect or negative emotional state as compared to people who have more extensive knowledge of vocabulary words that pertain to positive emotions so a crude example of what I just described is somebody that has fairly limited knowledge of words that describe positive emotional states so perhaps they recognize the word happy they recognize the word ecstatic they recognize the word joyful but they have a fairly limited word set that pertains to positive emotions whereas by comparison this is always relative within the same person right by comparison the person knows four times more words that pertain to a negative emotional state okay in general those people tend to be more depressive tend to have higher levels of anxiety and so forth as compared to somebody where the reverse pattern is true where they have knowledge of far more words that pertain to positive emotional states as compared to negative emotional states now on the face of it that result probably seems straightforward right people that have a lot of words to describe happiness are more happy people that have a lot of words to describe sadness and negative emotions are more sad but it didn't necessarily have to be that way and it turns out that it's not always that way what do I mean by that well the particular study that I've been describing here this natural emotion vocabularies as Windows on distress and well-being is an important paper because it explored not the words that people have knowledge of but the word patterns that people tend to use in their natural speech either spoken or written and what pen Baker and others showed is that people that tend to use a lot of negative words tend to have more negative emotional states whereas people that naturally tend to use words that describe positive emotional states have more positive emotions and this related to both mental and and physical metrics of negative emotions and positive emotions so this is a significant result because what it says is that our knowledge of vocabulary words is while interesting and perhaps important for other things is not nearly as important as which particular words we use on a frequent basis and so whereas before I said okay if you're going to embark on this protocol of four writing sessions 15 to 30 minutes each that you should not monitor your writing that you want to sit down start writing and just don't stop you don't want to pay attention to grammar or spelling or anything else and then after the fourth writing session you don't look at what you've written for at least a week but then a week or more later you go back and you read what you've written paying careful attention to the number of words that you use that reflect a negative emotional or affect as it's sometimes called state in the first versus the second versus the third versus the fourth journal entry now this might seem a little bit uh detailed and reductionist for a protocol that we would discuss on this podcast here we're really talking about you doing your own data analysis of self but if you think about it a practice like this both can be very quick and highly informative so for instance you can go back and simply Circle all the words that at first blush to you appear to reflect a negative State and put a square around all the words that just by your read seem to reflect a positive State and then compare them across those four journal entries and of course you can opt to not do any of this but what people find that is what was discovered in the research literature is that on average the patterns of language use from the 1 to the 4th entury shift dramatically such that by the 4th entury people even though they're still writing about the same negative experience are writing about that experience in a very different way not only are they naturally using fewer negative words to describe their recollection and experience experience of that negative event but the number of positive words is also increasing now this is important because when pen Baker and colleagues gave the instruction to people to do this protocol they encouraged them to think about three things before they ever start writing the first is of course to write about facts about that difficult experience I think that's sort of obvious that when people are going to recall a difficult experience they're likely to write down facts about that experience the second thing that they want to remind them to include were emotions that they felt at the time of the experience as well as emotions that they happen to feel now about that experience and third that people include writing about any and all links that come to mind about the negative experience and things that may be happening today or plans for the future people from the past present or future really any link no matter how distant it might seem or how random it might seem to include that in the the writing okay so just to repeat the three things that they were instructed to include before they ever set their pens to paper or started typing out their negative experience first facts about the hard experience so whatever they can recall that happened in that hard experience or perhaps it was something that didn't happen and that was why it was a hard experience but facts related to that hard experience facts of the hard experience second that they include writing about emotions felt at the time of the experience as well as emotions felt now while writing about that prior experience and third to include any writing about any links that spring to mind about the negative experience and anything that's happening now or perhaps happened in the past or things that you have plan for the future now that third category of links between the experience and other things may be direct and obvious maybe these are real aha moments where you go oh my goodness I realize now that you know what's been happening for the last 6 months is a direct mirror of what happened in that earlier traumatic or very stressful episode or perhaps the links are more opaque maybe the link is you know I don't know why but I keep thinking about this one experience that I had and I keep thinking about this one person and I don't know how they're linked that's fine put those down on paper you could even draw a diagram but I should mention it is important that you try to the best of your ability to write things out in complete sentences again they don't have to be perfect grammar or even pseudo perfect grammar the spelling can be off your handwriting can be a mess although if your handwriting is truly a mess it might be hard to read later by the way folks my older sister always teases me that my handwriting is frozen in the third grade actually uh would like to show her my journal entries my handwriting was actually quite a bit better than it is now uh which basically speaks to uh some degree of cognitive decline for me but in any case the point is that this third category of establishing links between the prior negative experience and whatever else is an important component of the writing protocol so whatever it takes to include those links they are worth including now I want to reemphasize that even though I pointed to the positive health benefits of using more positive words in one's writing or speech as opposed to negative words which tend to be associated with worse Health outcomes both in terms of physical and mental health it is important and it's Central to this writing protocol if you're going to get the positive consequences of it that you're not monitoring the words that you're using too closely you're not trying to write this so someone else can see it you're not trying to write the Great American novel you're not writing your eulogy you're not writing your autobiography you're really writing this for you I can't emphasize that enough you're doing this writing protocol so that you can work through something that is stressful or traumatic that resides in your nervous system and that is not serving you well indeed next we're going to talk about what happens when these narratives of our prior negative experiences are not worked through that they have not been put either to speech or to pen to paper or typed out and perhaps more importantly we're going to talk about the incredibly positive benefits both at the level of neural changes SOC called neuroplasticity which is the literal rewiring of neural connections as well as psychological benefits reduced anxiety improved mood improved sleep and improved immune function that are the consequence of doing this four bouts of 15 to 30 minute writing protocol as we all know quality nutrition influences of course our physical health but also our mental health and our cognitive functioning our memory our ability to learn new things and to focus and we know that one of the most important features of highquality nutrition is making sure that we get enough vitamins and minerals from highquality unprocessed or minimally processed sources as well as enough probiotics and prebiotics and fiber to support basically all the cellular functions in our body including the gut microbiome now I like most everybody try to get optimal nutrition from Whole Foods ideally mostly from minimally processed or nonprocessed Foods however one of the challenges that I and so many other people face is getting enough servings of high quality fruits and vegetables per day as well as fiber and probiotics that often accompany those fruits and vegetables that's why way back in 2012 long before I ever had a podcast I started drinking ag1 and so I'm delighted that ag1 is sponsoring the hubman Lab podcast the reason I started taking ag1 and the reason I still drink ag1 once or twice a day is that it provides all of my foundational nutritional needs that is it provides insurance that I get the proper amounts of those vitamins minerals probiotics and fiber to ensure optimal mental health physical health and performance if you'd like to try ag1 you can go to drink a1.com huberman to claim a special offer they're giving away five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 again that's drink a1.com huberman to claim that special offer okay so let's talk a little bit about the positive mental and in particular physical changes that occur in people that do this writing exercise I should mention that most of the studies and again more than 200 quality peer-reviewed studies of this protocol have been carried out and are still ongoing not just in pennebaker laboratory but in many many other Laboratories as well reveal that the positive physical shifts that occur in people that complete this for bouts of writing in the way I described is both significant and longlasting now of course it is not the case that these four episodes of writing can completely cure major forms of depression or post- trumatic stress disorder although they have been shown to benefit that is to reduce depressive symptoms and to reduce the symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder considerably but they shouldn't be considered complete Therapeutics for those conditions however however they have been shown to significantly improve many other health metrics and I alluded to some of these at the beginning of today's episode there have for instance been studies of this type of journaling protocol for people that have been suffering from chronic anxiety and insomnia and indeed they experienced significant relief as well people who have suffered from arthritis people who are going through cancer treatment people who have Lupus which is an autoimmune disorder report significantly improved symptoms not necessarily cured from those conditions but significantly improved symptoms as a consequence of doing this writing protocol in addition and earlier I mentioned this I realized but I'll mention again people suffering from fibromyalgia which is a chronic pain condition that is or can be very debilitating has shown significant Improvement in symptomology that is reduced chronic pain after they do this four bouts of writing in the way that I described and again the relief from pain seems to be ongoing again not a total cure of their symptoms I don't want to uh provide false hope here or overblow the um the positive impact of this particular writing protocol but nonetheless statistically significant shifts that were pervasive over time in addition people suffering from IBS or irritable bowel syndrome have achieved some significant degree of relief of their symptoms relative to people who also have irritable bowel syndrome but who do not do the exact same protocol that we're talking about today now of course in all of these studies we're not talking about people that simply do this writing protocol as compared to people that don't do the writing protocol pennebaker and others of course are excellent scientists and so they provide adequate control conditions the control conditions in most cases were to have people also do 15 to 30 minutes of writing but to do journaling in the more conventional manner of autobiographical report of what they've been up to lately or what they plan to do in fact very much like my journal entries from college and uh in the subsequent to that so it's important to understand that what we're talking about today is a journaling protocol which seems somewhat conventional but the exact protocol is highly unusual as we've been talking about throughout today's episode and in addition all of the data that we're discussing in terms of positive mental and physical effects are data that were established relative that is are statistically significant as compared to a control group that also wrote for an equivalent amount of time time tended to write out an equivalent number of words on average and yet we're writing about something quite different than the people that were in the so-called experimental group so it's important to keep in mind that we're not simply talking about phenomenology here we're talking about scientific studies where very specific measurements of the experimental group that is the group that did this particular form of writing about something very distressing or even traumatic four times 15 to 30 minutes per time relative to a control group that did nearly the equ equivalent form of mechanical processes of writing but that the specific emotional content related to that writing was the major variable that differed in fact that is one particular strength of the protocol we're describing today that if you think about it would be very hard to do in a study say of physical exercise where you have people perhaps you know run on a treadmill getting their heart rate up to 85% of their maximum heart rate for 30 minutes 5 days a week you would expect that that group compared to a group that did nothing would experience significantly greater shifts in positive Health metrics like lowered blood pressure certainly not during the exercise bout during the exercise bout you can bet that their blood pressure and heart rate went way way up but that of course afterwards they would adapt to that exercise by having a resting heart rate that was lower than any group that did nothing or that walked on a treadmill but it's actually very hard to think about a control group that would provide real equivalents of time spent and effort spent but that would differ only on one variable which would be heart rate you could probably come up with something but it'd be very difficult to do whereas in the studies that we're talking about during today's episode essentially everything was the same right people are still writing they're still sitting they're still doing it for the same amount of time it's simply that the content of the writing is different at the level of the emotional tone of the subject that they're writing about which I find both exciting and personally quite motivating to do the sort of protocol that I've described today because it leads to such dramatic shift in health across a huge range of Dimensions both in people suffering from certain conditions and people who are not suffering from certain conditions and then the question becomes why what is actually happening at a physiological level that can explain all of these incredible psychological and physical positive shifts that occur okay so as with any protocol that's shown in many many studies again here are more than 200 100 peer-reviewed studies to have positive effects on mental health or physical health you can imagine that there's going to be a constellation of positive effects that occur that can explain say the Improvement in autoimmune conditions or the Improvement in anxiety that is a reduction in anxiety or the Improvement in sleep patterns it's not going to be just one thing however there are some general categories of physiological changes that have been observed in people that do the particular protocol we're talking about today that I think can explain a great number of the mental and physical shifts that occur now one of the more important studies in this area that's been published and here again this is a paper by jimes pen Baker but I don't want to give the impression that he's the only person or the only laboratory that's looked at this particular writing protocol many others have as well and I'll provide links to some of those in the show note captions but this particular study I'm about to describe explored how the disclosure of traumas or the writing out of very stressful experiences can impact immune function at the level of specific cell types of our immune system that are challenged in a way that mimics the sort of challenge we would experience if we were to be exposed to a bacteria or virus now without getting into a detailed lecture about immunology and by the way I did an entire episode of The hubman Lab podcast about immune function in the brain uh some years ago and you can find that by going to HUB lab.com just put immune system into the search function it will take you to that episode and to any timestamps of other episodes where I touch on the immune system or protocols related to immune brain function in the meantime this particular study is very interesting and worth highlighting because what they did was to essentially have people do the exact same protocol that we've been describing throughout today's episode but they also included blood draws from the subjects in those experiments and they collected that blood from subjects both before and after the writing episodes in fact they took the blood 15 weeks prior to the study and again six weeks into the study okay now keep in mind that people were completing the writing exercise over the course of at a maximum four weeks but they were still monitoring these subjects in terms of their psychological and physical health after the final writing exercise that was a key component of essentially all of the studies of this particular protocol they'd assess people before they did the writing assignment they assessed people during the writing assignment and they assess people often long after the writing assignment was completed even years after the writing assignment was completed so in this particular experiment they're drawing blood 15 weeks before and 6 weeks into the study six weeks into the study is after all of the writing that is the four bouts of writing have been completed they also divided subjects in this study into people that were so-called high disclosers so these are people that revealed a lot about their particular traumatic or stressful episode in their writing and people that were low disclosers they also included a control group and the control group was essentially as I described before it consisted of people that also were doing journaling for the equivalent amount of time as people that were in the experimental group but that we're not writing about a traumatic or stressful experience now the basic takeaway of the study is as follows they take the blood they are able to isolate from the blood something called t-lymphocytes t-lymphocytes are an essential component of your immune system these are cells that many people describe as white blood cells they are manufactured in the bone marrow which I still find amazing right we think of bone is just these like you know hard components of our body and our skeleton that allow us to be upright and to be rigid and to move about and you know not be um you know jelly like but indeed in the center of the bone is marrow and the marrow itself is performing an important physiological role many roles in fact one of which is to create these t-lymphocytes or white blood cells they actually are born of the bone marrow but then they mature in a structure called the thymus the thymus is an organ that sits essentially behind your sternum and it's there that the cells that originate from the bone marrow are matured into what are effectively white blood cells which are essentially cells that go out and combat infections bacterial infections viral infections even fungal infections now they combat infection not alone but in collaboration with other immune cell types that you can learn about again in that episode that I did about the immune system and the nervous system if you choose to go listen to it and even if you don't here's what you need to know about this study in this study what they found is that when they took the blood from these subjects isolated those T lymphocytes and then challenged those t-lymphocytes with something that mimics an infection and they did that with something called con canavalin a concavalin a is what's considered aogen it's something that activates t-lymphocytes and it activates what are called natural killer cells now that's a lot of detail for sake of this episode basically what the con canavalin a is doing is it's mimicking an in section but in this particular study this is all being done on t-lymphocytes that have been collected they're put into a dish and then they're exposed to different concentrations going from low to medium to high of that con canavalin a mimicking a lowgrade moderate or severe infection and what they observed in this study is remarkable I mean to me it this just still blows my mind people that did this four bouts of writing protocol experienced greater degree of tlmy activation from The concanavalin mitogen Challenge which mimics infection then did people who wrote about something that wasn't stressful or traumatic now that itself is pretty striking if you think about it I mean we're talking about a writing exercise that generates an emotional state versus a writing exercise that does not produce as negative or intense an emotional state and we're talking about a significant effect on the immune system or the mobilization of immune cells in response to an immune challenge in addition to that however they observed that high disclosers that is people that really poured themselves into this writing protocol experienced a greater degree of immune activation that is a fighting off response to this mitogen concanavalin a then did people that were low disclosers so this really speaks to the fact that the intensity the emotional state during the writing exercise is having a significant impact on the immune system at the level of something as basic and yet as powerful as how much deployment of immune response there is to an infection now the field of so-called psychon neuroimmunology has been around for more than 30 years in fact if you don't apply standard definitions to that field it's been around for thousands of years but really it's only in the last 10 years or so that scientists and physicians at least standard scientists and Physicians have started to really adopt the understanding and really apply to their studies and their clinical practice this firm idea that the body and mind are linked in this way that emotions can really shape our physical responses and that physical responses also can shape of course our mental responses now I'm not trying to be disparaging at all of traditional science or medicine it's just that until recently these fields have existed more or less as silos people that studied bodily organs versus people that studied the brain people that studied emotions and psychology versus people that studied the immune system and there's been some crossover but by and large it's been very siloed now I mention this because if you look into the history of why James pennebaker and colleagues started exploring this particular pattern of journaling it actually relates to his own personal experience and I don't want to spend too much time on this but it's worth mentioning that pener has actually spoken about and written about in by the way an excellent book that I've linked to in the show note captions where he talks about his experience in suffering pretty severely from asthma as a child and that that asthma was seasonal and yet at some point later in his life because he had certain relatives visiting him in his new home location that his asthma would come and go as a consequence of interacting with certain members of his family independent of season and basically what he deduced from his own personal experience is that there must be some link between our emotions either negative or positive and our immune system or other physical ailments or thriving in the physical sense now he certainly wasn't the first one to come up with that hypothesis but indeed he was one of the first to really start exploring a protocol within the laboratory an experimental protocol that could really tap into high degrees of emotionality in this case negative emotions and the consequence of that on physical health outcomes and this study that I mentioned is but one one of those examples and in that way he's truly a Pioneer in thinking about quote unquote psychon neuroimmunology but couching it not in the direction that most people do which is for instance there have been lots of studies where people have said okay in people that are chronically stressed which includes of course psychological stress what are the effects on the nervous system the immune system Etc and as you could imagine in general people who were more stressed over long long periods of time had worse physical outcomes and people who were less stressed had better physical outcomes but the protocol that we're talking about today is quite a bit different so if you step back and think about it's a little counterintuitive what pennebaker essentially did was to have people deliberately induce a negative experience and yet they're seeing positive physical health outcomes or in this case positive effects on immune system function so that leads to the question of what's really happening during an after these four episodes of writing and that's where things get especially interesting as it relates to the nervous system system and to neuroplasticity or the nervous system's ability to rewire itself in response to experience so that's what we're going to talk about next I'd like to take a quick break and thank our sponsor insid tracker insid tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term Health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test a major problem with a lot of blood tests out there however is that you get information back about metabolic factors lipids and hormones and so forth but you don't know what to do with that information with inside tracker they make it very easy because they have a personalized platform that allows you to see the levels of all those things metabolic factors lipids hormones Etc but it gives you specific directives that you can follow that relate to nutrition behavioral modification supplements Etc that can help you bring those numbers into the ranges that are optimal for you if you'd like to try inside tracker go to insid tracker.com huberman for this week only meaning now through November 26th insid tracker is offering 50% off all bundles and 30% off all other tests again that's insidetracker docomo okay so what's happening at a mechanistic level that allows people who do these four bouts of writing about something traumatic or stressful to achieve these longlasting positive shifts in mental and physical health now there could be any number of different changes occurring at the level of the mind or body but what we're talking about here is trying to find the pivotal one or sometimes referred to as the Lynch pin mechanism that when one Taps into that mechanism it Wicks out into all these different systems of the brain and body and provides all of these different positive benefits now in researching this episode I thought long and hard about this and came up with a short list of ideas and as is always the case people have worked in this area on this particular protocol and protocols similar to it in the the field of Psychology and Neuroscience have also generated their own short list and those short lists converge at the level of one particular mechanism that is worth describing and that one particular mechanism is anchored around the concept of neuroplasticity that is our nervous systems ability to change in response to experience and if you've heard me talk about neuroplasticity before neuroplasticity in childhood occurs through rather passive experience of any sorts of events in fact one of the Hallmarks of childhood is that just the mere exposure to an experience reshapes the brain not necessarily permanently but often in a way that is very longlasting now that's a feature of childhood because if you think about what the nervous system is really designed to do for us it's of course what allows us to move our limbs it's what allows us to have a heart rate that goes in the background without us having to think about it so-called autonomic functions it's what keeps us breathing without us having to think about it and on and on but one of the main functions of the nervous system is to be a predictive machine to make good guesses about what's to come next and one of the ways to make really good guesses about what's to come next is to take a certain period of life that we call childhood superimpose on that period of life that childhood what we call a critical period or sensitive period during which our experiences create a sort of map within us that allow us to predict okay well if this person's in the room later well then that's likely to happen or if those people are in the room any number of different things could happen but of one particular category of experience as opposed to another that's really what your nervous system does it becomes a prediction machine and it becomes a prediction Machine by drawing strong correlations between emotional states your physical surroundings your perception of who's there what's there what happened just prior to something and how it made you feel later so when we talk about recounting a stressful or traumatic event if you recall there were three components to it it involved facts about that experience so literally who was there what happened as to the best of our recollection if you recall the second thing it's also about recounting how that experience made you feel at the time and how it makes you feel now and then if you recall the third thing that's critical to include it's about any links or associations between what happened and really anything at all so if you think about it all three of those things in that list are really about tapping into your neural map or your schema as it's sometimes called or your internal representation both conscious and unconscious of what happened during that stressful or traumatic event now a Hallmark feature of traumas as well as a Hallmark feature of addictions as well as a Hallmark feature of compulsive behaviors or negative habitual behaviors and negative habitual States like chronic stress anxiety the sorts of things that trigger insomnia the sorts of states of body that trigger immune compromise and give us autoimmune or other types of immune system challenges are that a certain component of our nervous system and our brain in particular are less engaged than they normally would be in the healthy condition now I want to be clear that in any one of these conditions whether or not it's irritable bowel syndrome or it's fibromyalgia or it's chronic anxiety or depression there are many many different brain centers and networks that is stations within the nervous system of the brain and body that are involved I really want to emphasize this there's no one location in the brain for instance for fear or anxiety it's always a network phenomenon the relative activation of different brain centers at different times and so on but with respect to thinking about traumas and stressful experiences we have to ask ourselves what is it about the emotional states and all the mapping the representation around those emotional experiences that would somehow impact our immune system like our thymus of all things or our bone marrow or conversely what would it be about a stressful experience that would impact our heart rate that would somehow then also change our brain so the mechanism that seems to be a sort of Smoking Gun of sorts that is the mechanism that really does seem to be at least one of those Lynch pin mechanisms is that when we experience very stressful or traumatic experiences our prefrontal cortex the neural real estate that's just behind our forehead which has several different subdivisions in fact is reduced in its overall levels of activity and other areas of the brain that sometimes are referred to as the limit LIC areas of the brain although if we were to be more accurate than that the modern Neuroscience really refers to these as subcortical structures they aren't necessarily lyic structures per se although they can include components of the lyic system so they can include things like the hypothalamus so this dense collection of neurons that resides over the roof of your mouth that's involved in things like aggression or temperature regulation sleep wake cycles and so on as well as structures that perhaps you've heard more about such as the amygdala which is involved in threat detection but other structures as well all of which are subcord cortical now those subcortical structures can be compared in a fairly General but still accurate way to the prefrontal cortex which is involved in contextual planning involved in assessing outcomes if I do a what will happen if I do B what will happen the prefrontal cortex is also associated with our self-concept of our identity who we are what we are about what we value what motivates our decisions to do or to not do things so I don't want to create any false impressions that the prefrontal cortex is somehow a more evolved structure than the subcortical and lyic structures but in some sense it is it's involved in more quote unquote sophisticated functions or at least functions that involve us really thinking and being able to place a coherent Narrative of what happened in the past what's happening now and what's likely to happen in the future if conditions a b or c happen to arise okay so that's a very brief top level Contour less in prefrontal cortical function and comparing it a bit to some subcortical and lyic structure functions now there have been neuroimaging studies in particular Studies by the liberman laboratory at University of California Los Angeles but neuroimaging studies in other Laboratories as well that have established that when people recount very stressful or traumatic events the prefrontal cortex level of activity is reduced as compared to when people recall less stressful or less traumatic events in addition to that those subcortical structures ramp up their activity when people recall traumatic events at least at first okay this is very important what I'm about to tell you is that the repeated visiting of stressful and traumatic events in a structured way or even in a pseudo structured way as is the case when people first start journaling about that stressful or traumatic event on day one when it tends to be a pretty unstructured narrative that's actually been shown in the literature and then over the course of that second and third and fourth writing bout people not only shift the sort of language that they use to describe their feelings and that event as we talked about earlier but the degree to which there's a more coherent narrative placed on the structure of that writing increases with each subsequent bout of writing and this is very important because what we're really talking about here is people going deeper into their recollection of the experience not remaining at such a superficial level and two things are happening even though they're going deeper into this very distressing event they're perhaps even experiencing heightened levels of distress right if you recall back to earlier in the episode when I talked about people who tend to be on the low disclosure end of things they're not very rbos they don't tend to use a lot of emotional words and early on they're not sharing too much about this experience and over time it increases whereas the other group decreased the level of emotionality with each subsequent writing bout but in each case the coherence of the narrative that is the degree to which the narrative takes on a story-like structure increases from the first to the fourth writing bout and this is very important because what we're really talking about here is increasing the amount of [Music] truthtellah in your mind what were the facts what happened what didn't happen perhaps is relevant too but what happened second how did it make you feel that's something that you are uniquely qualified to answer factually because only you can really know how you feel sometimes it takes some effort to think into how you feel to really get a clear sense of how you felt and how you feel but only you can report that factually no one can dispute that those are your feelings and that's part of what you're writing about and then of course there's the third component of what are the connections between different experiences that are coming to mind and there again that is your unique factual report of what's going on inside your head around that event okay so what we're talking about here is an exercise in writing that yes is distressing but that we know Based on neuroimaging data overtime is increasing the Baseline levels of activity in certain key areas of the prefrontal cortex and that we know is associated with improvements in the symptomology around trauma and other stressful events now it's extremely important to highlight this truth-telling component and the fact that your truth about these experiences is indeed your truth and it's such a key component of the writing exercise so what we're looking at here is a situation where the event or events that happened actually happen there's no changing that but your narrative about those events is vitally important in terms of how you experience either Ono going distress from or relief from those events and in sort of a counterintuitive way reporting those events in a way that initially is very stressful or that can be stressful in any number of those different four writing bouts over time provides relief from that stress so why do I say counterintuitive well you could say okay well then does distress itself cause changes in the prefrontal cortex that are positive No in fact the opposite is true we know that being under I conditions of duress or stress or trauma reduces activity in the prefrontal cortex and here we're saying recalling that trauma and stress in ways that are highly emotional and negative is actually increasing ongoing activity in the prefrontal cortex and indeed yes that is the case so how could that be during development neuroplasticity is a passive process whatever we are exposed to changes our brain in a way that allows us to more reliably predict the future right that's one of the key functions of the brain but as an adult meaning from age 25 onward and really that's not a strict cut off could be late teens maybe 19 all the way up to say age 120 which we think is perhaps the maximum lifespan that humans could possibly reach we don't know most people don't reach 120 but let's say from 19 all the way up to 120 we know that neuroplasticity is created when the nervous system goes into states that are atypical as compared to our normal waking States and one of the key triggers for neuroplasticity is when we have high levels of the so-called catacol amines dopamine epinephrine Endor norepinephrine in our brain and body that creates a state change that we call autonomic nervous system shift where we have elevated heart rate more distress High degrees of emotionality it is highly uncomfortable often and yet that signals to the neural tissue hey something's happening here and we need to rewire we need to change and the actual rewiring occurs during deep sleep sleep and states such as non-sleep deep rest or anytime we're in a deep relaxation State some of you have heard me talk about neuroplasticity before but the key elements to remember for today's discussion is that these states of heightened levels of emotionality are the trigger for neuroplasticity and that the actual rewiring of neural connections happens in sleep and states such as non-sleep deep breast so if we were to be completely logical we would sit back at this point and say okay here's a protocol in which we deliberately make ourselves stressed out again about a very stressful or traumatic event and yet even though that stressful or traumatic event at first created problems for our mental and physical health by revisiting it and triggering that stressful experience again four times in a lot of detail somehow it's giving me relief from that experience it's creating positive mental and physical shifts I mean how could that be how could it be that the negative experience on the one hand creates problems and then on the other hand recreating that negative experience relieves those very same problems there's something completely illogical about that framework right well here's where things get really interesting there have been two separate collections of work in the Psychology and Neuroscience literature in the last 10 years which have focused mainly on two concepts the first concept is that extremely stressful and traumatic experiences because they induce a relative reduction in the activity in the prefrontal cortex divorce our mind from creating a coherent structural narrative about what happened during those particular episodes and in doing so create a sort of confusion about responsibility now there's a whole discussion to be had about this and we will have that discussion in a future episode of the podcast about how trauma is actually mapped within the brain and body there are a lot of theories about this right sometimes we hear that it's all mapped within the body sometimes we hear it's all mapped within the brain turns out as is almost always the case it's both but there does seem to be both neuroscience-based and psychology both clinical and research psychology based evidence for the idea that when people experience very stressful and traumatic events that the representation of those events is somewhat fractured in the sense that people by not talking about them by not creating a coherent narrative around them start to form false correlations between the kind of stress that they create in our body and mind when we think about them and a confusion about what happened a confusion about why we feel terrible when maybe we weren't the perpetrator or create a sort of lack of coherence between our bodily State and what we're thinking especially because we're not the perpetrator right here we're talking about traumas and stressful things that happened to us maybe we were participants in that by virtue of our circumstances but when we talk about traumas what we're really talking about are things that we would have never elected to do otherwise okay so I don't want to be too abstract about this but again within the neuroscience and psychology understanding of trauma and stress it seems that there's a lack of coherence about the narrative there's also a mismatch between the bodily State and thoughts about that experience and there seems to be a confusion about who or what was responsible for inducing that negative state in a way that in some sense causes people to set aside that narrative and try and push it away and not think about it because it is confusing it can often even be discombobulating for those that have suffered from very stressful events and Trauma I think some of this will resonate with you now a separate literature that's largely nested just within the Neuroscience Community although it's starting to Wick out into the psychology Community as well is the idea that when people tell the truth and in particular when people tell the truth with a very coherent structured narrative the levels of activity in the prefrontal cortex increase but not just temporarily that is that there's neuroplasticity of these prefrontal cortical structures which are both involved in generating coherent narratives but are also involved in this is super important that are also involved in regulating the activity of those subcortical structures like the hypothalamus and lyic structures in other words that when we can increase our understanding of an event when we can understand why certain emotions arose what our role in it really was what others roles in that particular event were well then by incre ining the activity of the prefrontal cortex it's better both in that moment and going forward to regulate the activity of these other subcortical structures and I think one of the more impressive experiments within that whole field of linking prefrontal activity to truth-telling is an experiment that was published a few years ago in the proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences entitled increasing honesty in humans with non-invasive brain stimulation now this is a very artificial scenario where people come into the laboratory and they have people do what is essenti a die rolling game they roll dice okay so they're rolling Dice and then after they roll the dice only they can see the score that they get with those Dice and then a number is presented on a screen and they have to report whether or not the die roll that they did matches or does not match the number that's presented on the screen and if it does match then they get a monetary award and the monetary award is not huge but it's not insignificant either for each die roll where they match the number that's presented on the screen they get the equivalent of and because this experiment was done in Switzerland nine Swiss Franks which at the time of the study corresponded roughly to $9 and today corresponds to roughly $10 so they do this repeatedly and so in some sense the subjects in these experiments are in a place to make not an enormous amount of money but again not an insignificant amount either now here's the key component of the study the statistics of the dice that they roll and the statistics of die rolling and the numbers that they are presented make sure that there can only be a correct match on average 50% of the time okay and in this experiment the subjects are asked to report entirely on the honor System what they got when they rolled the dice and what one finds in this study and other studies that have been done subsequent to it is that when you take everyday people so you take men and women you take a broad age range you're not selecting for sociopaths you're not selecting for people in one given profession or another pick your favorite profession if you were to assume any one given profession has less honest people than others they collect people from all sorts of walks of life and people report getting the same number that is presented to them that is a match about 68% of the time which means they are not Faithfully reporting what happened now Nur Imaging studies show that when people lie certain areas of the frontal cortex increase in their activity although the major effect when one looks neurally is a reduction in the prefrontal cortex and in particular subcompartments of the prefrontal cortex that we'll talk about in a moment and this particular study entitled increasing honesty in humans with non-invasive brain stimulation as the name suggests used non-invasive brain stimulation so this is transcranial magnetic stimulation which is a really nice and convenient tool because you don't have to drill down through the skull you can simply put this tool it's a little coil you put it over a particular part of the brain but on the outside of the skull indeed on the outside of the hair and you can either inhibit or stimulate particular brain areas using this transcranial stimulation I've actually had this done not in this particular experiment but I had it done when I was a graduate student some years ago and it was placed over my motor cortex and I was instructed to tap my fingers in a particular sequence and then they inhibit neur activity in a particular brain area and I was unable to tap in that same sequence and they could even shut down my ability to tap it was terrifying frankly although I don't want to discourage anyone from participating in any of these experiments should you choose and yes of course your motor abilities come back immediately afterwards that's why they can run these experiments now in this experiment what they did is they stimulated or inhibited neural activity in particular areas of the prefrontal cortex and what they discovered was I think and many others by the way also agree a remarkable result which is that when they stimulated over a particular region of the prefrontal cortex people's honest report of what happened when they rolled the die relative to the number they were presented increased okay so they went from reporting that they had matched the number on the screen and therefore won money 68% of the time that number was reduced down to what down to 50% of the time in other words this stimulation of the prefrontal cortex took dishonest people even though they were should we say mildly dishonest or dishonest only in certain conditions there were getting into judgment calls and I don't want to do that and made them truly honest they Faithfully represented reality when a particular area of the prefrontal cortex and that area by the way is the dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex was activated they became truly honest they Faithfully represented what happened in the diary rolling game now the conditions in this experiment are Far and Away different from the journaling protocol that we've talked about up until now however there have been subsequent studies that have shown that indeed when people tell the truth to the best of their abilities they are absolutely trying to Faithfully report what happened in a given experience of theirs activity in the prefrontal cortex goes up and it persists afterwards there is indeed neuroplasticity of the prefrontal cortex so the hypothesis that seems to be the most likely and indeed has the greatest weight of evidence for it is that when people accurately and truthfully report an experience even if that experience is a stressful and traumatic one the repeated activation of the prefrontal cortex that occurs during that truthtellah a sort of runaway positive effect in the sense that it creates a more coherent framework and understanding of the stressful thing that happened right so all that discombobulation and that lack of coherent story that then leads to lack of coherence in terms of one's autonomic function so underlying stress and confusion about who's responsible that does seem to be resolved or at least partially resolved and the prefrontal cortex of course doesn't Harbor one area just for faithful accurate reporting of traumas and stressful events that very same area that dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex is responsible for faithful reporting of all sorts of other things and there are now more and more studies showing that truthtellah are in agreement that when one sees all these positive shifts in say immune system function like how could it be that these cells produced by the bone marrow and the thymus are somehow better able to deal with an infection when one has recounted a traumatic or stressful event right first of all it's counterintuitive second of all why would that be I mean how are the body and brain linked in that way well they're linked through this thing that we call the nervous system and the key component of the nervous system in this context is that when the prefrontal cortex can organize its understanding of why our autonomic nervous system was so active well then the autonomic nervous system it seems becomes less likely to be active when it's not supposed to okay that could at least partially explain the reductions in anxiety the improvements in sleep the reductions in insomnia and because the nervous system and the immune system are in direct communication this often isn't discussed but not only does the immune system impact the brain but the brain has Networks literally neural circuits that inate structures like the spleen like the phalus that can communicate with the bone marrow right this isn't science fiction this is really the case in fact there was an article that just came out in the journal Nature this month and I'll provide a link to in the show note captions which is finally starting to acknowledge that yes while these fields of immunology and brain science and psychology have existed as disperate silos up until now it's oh so clear that the nervous system is the connection between all these different components of brain and body and so while it might seem counterintuitive that a writing protocol of the sort that we've been talking about today could positively impact the immune system or that a writing protocol of the sort that we were talking about today could positively impact things like Fibromyalgia symptoms well it makes perfect sense really when we start to think about the prefrontal cortex as this highly flexible seat of our cognition about our self-representation our ideas about who we are and about when certain elements within our brain and body ought to be activated and when they ought not to be activated because so much of the negative symptomology of stressful events and traumas is about the kind of disarray and discombobulated activation of wakefulness in the middle of sleep right getting woken up in the middle of the night and not being able to go back to sleep or elevated heart rate panic attacks anxiety and on and on I talked about some of this in the hubin lab podcast episode that I did about stress and how to master stress with particular protocol olss it also came up in the discussion with Dr Paul kti in the episode about trauma and the series on mental health so what we're pulling together here is a mechanistic understanding of why something like writing for 15 to 30 minutes about a stressful or traumatic episode would or even could induce all these positive shifts in mental and physical health and while we don't have a complete understanding about the underlying mechanisms the activation and the neuroplasticity of the prefrontal cortex seems to be one of the most logical and the most likely that sits at the center of at least the top list of the most important mechanisms I want to be clear that yes indeed I'm saying that when you write about your truth about the facts the events of an experience and your emotions as they relate to that experience and the connections that you draw between any number of different things around that experience that the truth telling is the stimulus and that the emotion that accompanies that truth-telling is what allows for neuroplasticity to occur and that indeed truthtreatments course and in fact the data on the sort of journaling that we talked about today indicate that people's progression through talk therapy drug therapies etc for depression and PTSD is accelerated and significantly so when they do this type of journaling so the sort of journaling we're talking about today and other therapies are not mutually exclusive and yet the journaling protocol that pen Baker and colleagues came up with I think is spectacular because it has a number of important features and some of those are perhaps obvious to you already first of all it's completely Z zero cost I mean it costs a bit of time but not even that much time it has an emotional cost we should acknowledge that it's intense right and the more intense it seems the more effective and third it's something that really can be done either in the course of four days or across an entire month so it has some degree of flexibility to it I would even say a great degree of flexibility to it and last but certainly not least it's been shown over and over again I mean more than 200 peer-reviewed studies not just from pener but from others as well to have Myriad positive effects on the body and the mind in ways that are not just short-term but that are pervasive not just over months but indeed over years so I don't know about you but when I first learned about this literature I was well initially a little bit skeptical because that's just my nature I'm like wait how could journaling have such a huge impact I mean I've been journaling for years I know other people that journal on a regular basis and I've never heard of this particular impact and I certainly haven't heard heard or seen the data but when I started looking at the data I thought oh my goodness like how come I haven't heard about this and I I don't really have an answer for that although I will say that penne Baker and others I think were very early in their merging of Mind and Body States although the initial studies weren't really focused on mind and body all the emphasis on immune system and brain and Neuroscience that actually came later so I think one of the reasons we haven't heard about this particular form of journaling is that frankly it's nested within the academic literature I haven't heard much about it being incorporated into clinical practices although I am sure it is incorporated into clinical practices and frankly whatever the reason I'm just grateful to my colleague Dr David Spiegel who again is our associate chair of Psychiatry at Stanford he's a medical doctor of incredibly highly esteemed worldwide for his work on neuroplasticity and helping people with Stress and Anxiety and all sorts of other challenges for informing me about it so much so that I decided that next month I'm going to do one bout of writing for each week within that month I've opted to not do the four consecutive days of writing to me just personally that seems a bit too intense it's not the time commitment it's the emotional commitment of placing myself into close proximity of some really challenging stressful maybe even traumatic memories day after day after day for 4 days personally I don't want to do that other people might opt to do that in um you know tighter succession and do the the four days in a row what the literature tells us again is that it doesn't really matter um as long as you do the four bouts of writing sometime within a month period doesn't matter if they all are back-to-back days or you spread them out by a week or so just to recap the other components of the protocol you're going to write about the same event for all four writing episodes those writing episodes can be anywhere from 15 to 30 minutes but not less throughout each writing episode you're going to continuously write right unless you need to stop to catch your breath or wipe your eyes dry of Tears you're going to keep writing it is not necessary to pay attention to grammar or spelling but some degree of coherence maybe not perfect complete sentences but some degree of coherence is probably useful especially if you decide to go back and analyze what you wrote later which again is an option you don't have to do that but if you do want to do that you're going to go back and circle the negative words that is the words that you perceive to be negative and you're going to square the words that are positive and if you like you can also reread them and see whether or not as was observed in the studies that we described there was an increase in the amount of coherence about the topic or the event that you wrote about keep in mind that for each of the four boutots of writing you want to include both facts about the events facts about how you felt and or feel about those events now and third any associations whatsoever that happen to come to mind about those events emotional states people in your life anything past present or future that third category of things to include is really open to you for anything you want to include the only requirement for it to be included is that it's true for you keep in mind also that this writing protocol is for you it is not necessarily to be shared now there isn't a rule that says that you cannot share it with anybody although I do want to introduce the important caveat that if you are going to share it with someone that person should be a dedicated Health Care ideally mental health care professional because there are data that suggest that when we write about traumatic and stressful events while it can be very beneficial for us it can actually be traumatic or challenging for people that we read it to now there's huge variation around that statement certainly many of you probably know friends or family members or other trusted ones that you can talk to that would be able to hear about your stressful or traumatic experience and not be traumatized by it however it does seem that the listener can experience trauma and negative symptoms such as challenges sleeping distress Etc by hearing about very stressful events that have occurred to others okay this is thirdhand trauma or observational trauma sometimes called so if we were to adhere to the protocol as it was used in the various studies that form the basis for what we're talking about today we would say that you are writing about something that is for your eyes only in fact you are welcome to tear up or delete the document afterwards and certainly you would want to store it in a safe place so that it's not going to fall into hands of somebody that you wouldn't want seeing the contents of that writing the other thing to keep in mind is that while it's been demonstrated over and over again that over time these bouts of writing lead to improvements in mental and physical health as we talked about earlier it is very normal and in fact quite likely that one will feel pretty activated in the negative sense that one will feel somewhat low depressed angry sad immediately after finishing one of these bouts of writing especially if you fall into the high expressor category so it's important that as we mentioned earlier that you have a buffer of time after which you complete the writing before moving into your other day's events I also just personally wouldn't recommend that you do this writing exercise just prior to trying to go to sleep at night if the experience is especially stressful or traumatic and by definition the writing exercise focuses on stressful and traumatic events so keep that in mind as well and then as a final point but certainly a significant one is to keep in mind that if this writing protocol is creating in you significant enough amounts of stress either psychological or physical that you simply don't want to do it or that it's impeding other areas of life by all means just stop okay there was very little if any data within the papers that I read that indicated that people had to be removed from the study for this reason but keep keep in mind that we're talking about purposefully delving into stressful or traumatic experiences and writing about them in some detail so it stands to reason that some people might not be able to tolerate that and I want to strongly request that before anyone embark on this writing protocol that you ask yourself whether or not you are indeed prepared to deal with the emotional state that might accompany faithful accurate recollection of what happened what you felt and any links or experiences a full four four times across the protocol I also see no reason why you couldn't do this protocol for something that wasn't the most stressful or traumatic event in your life but rather take your first pass at this protocol with something that was very stressful maybe even traumatic but perhaps not the most traumatic event as a way of sampling whether or not it's for you in fact I plan to do that in reviewing the literature and preparing for today's episode I wrote down two things possibly three that I would want to write about and then I ra ated them one through three one being the most stressful perhaps even traumatic the other being less stressful and the third the least stressful of the three and decided to go with writing about the second in that list that is the moderately stressful AK traumatic event um as a way to First weade into this protocol but I will adhere to the protocol I'm going to write about that same thing four times as opposed to switching from one event to the next Midway through the protocol so I am going to adhere to the protocol I'll certainly be happy to get back to you and let you know how it goes I invite you if you like to embrace this protocol to try it we've provided links to the literature that supports this protocol again it's very rare perhaps the first time that I've ever done an entire podcast episode about a single protocol or to formulate an entire podcast around a protocol but frankly I don't look at this protocol from pennebaker and colleagues as just a protocol I look at it as an entire body of literature that includes a center of massive data that all seem to point in the same direction which is that writing about something very stressful or traumatic for 15 to 30 minutes four times either on consecutive days or separated out by a week between each of those four writing sessions can produce long lasting positive effects on mental and physical health and to me that's a protocol that is simply too valuable to overlook and simply too valuable to not share with you if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc costway to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a f star review please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or topics or guests that you'd like me to consider for the huberman Lab podcast please put those in the comments section on YouTube I do read all the comments not on today's episode but on many previous episodes of The hubin Lab podcast we discussed supplements while supplements aren't necessary for every everybody many people derived tendous benefit from them for things like improving sleep for hormone support and for improving Focus to learn more about the supplements discussed on the hubman Lab podcast you can go to live momentus spelled o so it's Liv mous.com huberman if you're not already following me on social media I'm hubman lab on all social media platforms so that's Instagram Twitter now called X LinkedIn Facebook and threads and on all of those platforms I discuss science and science related tools some of which overlap with the contents of the hubman podcast but much of which are distinct from the contents of the hubman Lab podcast so again it's hubman lab on all social media platforms if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network newsletter the neural network newsletter is a monthly newsletter that's completely zero cost that includes podcast summaries as well as toolkits toolkits are brief PDFs that describe protocols for things like neuroplasticity for improving your sleep for dopamine regulation for exercise flexibility and on and on again all completely zero cost to sign up for the neural network newsletter you simply go to huberman lab.com go to the menu tab scroll down to newsletter and put your email there you'll receive an email and if you approve you'll start receiving the monthly newsletter again it's completely zero cost and I want to point out that we do not share your email with anybody thank you for joining for today's episode where we discussed a journaling protocol that has been demonstrated in the scientific literature to significantly improve mental and physical health and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in [Music] science

========================================

--- Video 169 ---
Video ID: eC9fiJBdMG0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eC9fiJBdMG0
Title: LIVE EVENT Q&A: Dr. Andrew Huberman Question & Answer in Toronto, ON
Published: 2023-11-15 13:00:25 UTC
Description:
Recently I had the pleasure of hosting a live event in Toronto, ON. This event was part of a lecture series called The Brain Body Contract. My favorite part of the evening was the question & answer period, where I had the opportunity to answer questions from the attendees of each event. Included here is the Q&A from our event in Toronto, ON at Meridian Hall. 

We'll be hosting four live events in Australia in February 2024. Limited tickets remain for our show in Melbourne on February 10, 2024, and Brisbane on February 24, 2024. Our show in Sydney at the Sydney Opera House sold out quickly, so we've added a second show at the Aware Super Theatre on February 18, 2024. For tickets and event details, please visit https://www.hubermanlab.com/events.

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

Timestamps
00:00:00 Introduction
00:02:41 What Motivated You to Do the Guest Series With Dr. Paul Conti?
00:08:07 Enhancing Emotional Resilience in Triggering Situations: Protocols and Best Practices
00:12:46 Understanding and Fostering Sudden Inspiration in the Brain
00:16:36 How Can Canadians Fight the Season Depression?
00:22:45 How Do You Increase Neuroplasticity After 30?
00:28:46 What Type of Movement Protocol Do You Recommend for Someone Working From Home?
00:33:02 What Does Your Morning Meditation Consist Of?
00:38:05 Conclusion

#HubermanLab #Science

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English
ANDREW HUBERMAN: Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Recently, the Huberman Lab hosted a live event at the Meridian Theater in Toronto, Ontario. The event consisted of a lecture entitled "The Brain Body Contract" followed by a question and answer session. We wanted to make sure that the question and answer session was available to everybody regardless of who could attend in person. I also want to make sure to thank the sponsors of that event, which were AG1 and Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. One of the key things to getting a great night's sleep is to make sure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct. And that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop by about one to three degrees. And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your body temperature actually has to increase by about one to three degrees. With Eight Sleep, you can program the temperature of your sleeping environment in the beginning, middle, and end of your night. It has a number of other features like tracking the amount of rapid eye movement and slow wave sleep that you get, things that are essential to really dialing in the perfect night's sleep for you. I've been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress cover for well over two years now, and it has greatly improved my sleep. I fall asleep far more quickly. I wake up far less often in the middle of the night, and I wake up feeling far more refreshed than I ever did prior to using an Eight Sleep mattress cover. If you'd like to try Eight Sleep, you can go to eightsleep.com/huberman to save $150 off their Pod 3 Cover. Eight Sleep currently ships to the USA, Canada, UK, select countries in the EU, and Australia. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman. AG1 is an all in one vitamin mineral probiotic drink. I've been taking AG1 since 2012, so I'm delighted that they sponsored the live event. The reason I started taking AG1 and the reason I still drink AG1 once or twice a day is that it provides all of my foundational nutritional needs. That is, it provides insurance that I get the proper amounts of those vitamins, minerals, probiotics, and fiber to ensure optimal mental health, physical health, and performance. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to drinkag1.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They're giving away five free travel packs plus a year's supply of Vitamin D3+K2. Again, that's drinkag1.com/huberman to claim that special offer. And now without further ado, the question and answer session from our live event at the Meridian Theater in Toronto, Ontario. OK. What motivated me to do the guest series with Paul Conti? OK. So first of all, for those of you that don't know, Paul Conti is a psychiatrist. He's a Stanford and Harvard trained psychiatrist, and I wanted to do the series with Paul for several reasons, and we initiated that series. First of all, he's incredibly talented as a clinician. And yet despite having written an excellent book about trauma, I felt that two things were true for sure. One is that most people won't get the opportunity to work with Paul, sadly. He's time limited. And second is that his expertise is incredibly vast not just restricted to trauma. Traumas, if understood, can be transmuted into deep sources of knowledge that other people can benefit from. Indeed, what I found in Paul as I got to know him is that he has just profound insight into the unconscious mind. And people had long asked me in and around the podcast, what about the subconscious? What about the unconscious? And I was of the mind that the supercomputer of the human brain is the forebrain, the thinking, planning, context, setting piece right behind our forehead. It's the reason that we're not the house cats. The house cats are the house cats, and it's the reason we're the curators of the planet. But Paul said, oh, no, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no, no. The unconscious mind is the supercomputer of the mind. I'm like, well, that sounds great. But how do we understand the unconscious mind? And he has a really biological and psychological and psychiatric understanding of the unconscious. And in that series, he talks about these so-called cupboards that we can look into in order to better understand our unconscious mind in order to allow our unconscious mind to teach us things about ourselves that are useful. And there are three main places where our unconscious teaches us useful things that allow us to be more conscious of the way that our brain is working in useful ways. The first is in these liminal states between waking and sleep. It really does seem to be the case that when, surprise, surprise, we're completely still and we're emerging from or we're dropping into states of reduced autonomic arousal but our level of thought, if you will, is still active enough that we are aware maybe even lucid dreams and also in dreams, our unconscious mind uses, as I think Jung and Freud pretty well understood, symbols to teach us things. But everything's flipped in there. Gender's flipped. Just because you're having a conflict with somebody in your life who's a man doesn't mean that person shows up as a man. They could show up as an animal, so species are flipped. The symbols become mishmashed, but Paul made it very clear that all this can be parsed if you do a certain kind of introspective work. And I thought that would mean a lot of talk therapy. How are we going to get people to learn how to do talk therapy by themselves? We want to keep things as much independent of cost and things like that. And the practices he started talking about were incredibly simple. Things like mirror work-- some of the psychologists in the room will be familiar with this. I thought, mirror work? What is that? And he said, literally, people trying to access their unconscious in sleep by a practice of staring into the mirror for some period of time while awake and reflecting on self and aspirations and the idea of the body as a container. All this stuff, even for a kid from Northern California, sounds really, woo, new agey. But here, it's scripted by Paul into a formal structure that one can use to parse your own mental health and enhance mental health. So that was the reason for doing the series. And especially the episode on relationships, not just romantic relationships, I found-- hasn't come out yet. Incredibly interesting, because he talked about how in his clinical experience, virtually all the stuff that people pay attention to in relational stuff is, are they a narcissist? Are they obsessive? Is this person a musician versus whether or not I'm an accountant? Are we compatible? That none of that stuff predicts anything as well as the balance of these three drives-- the aggressive drive, the pleasure drive, and the so-called generative drive. And I found it to be fascinating, and I'm excited for that episode and the other episodes to come out. But basically, because Paul is brilliant. And he makes what I consider pretty obscure and opaque very clear and concrete, and there are a bunch of worksheets-- again, all available at zero cost and none of them requiring that you do therapy with anybody if you choose not to. This is all the kind of work that one could do on oneself. And the last thing I'll say about this is-- and I should have said this first-- is that the primary motivation was we did a series of Dr. Andy Galpin on physical fitness. Why isn't there a series on mental fitness? What is that? Why do we talk so much about mental health when we're-- and it's usually a conversation about mental illness. People should have tools and practices that are zero cost, I believe, to be able to introspect in a structured way and enhance their mental health independent of their level of income, and I think Paul was the guy to do it. And we'll do more of that with other people as well because no single episode about any topic or series can exhaustively cover any topic, although Lord knows we will try. OK. Next question. What are the recommended protocols and best practices to enhance emotional resilience and develop effective responses during highly triggering situation? You're asking the wrong guy. [LAUGHTER] I mean, I don't snap. I don't snap. I was a wild teenager, but I don't snap. I'm not the aggressor, but I do have a snap button, and it's been pushed before. And I have to say when that happens, it's really kind of a scary thing. Not to me, right? And it's been many years. But I think anyone who's hit that threshold where you're trying not to say something, you say it anyway. That's usually how it shows up for people. I think we hear the statements. Be responsive, not reactive. That's why I became a biologist because stuff like that makes no sense to me. In that moment, how are you responsive, not reactive? So to me, it was like, what are the tools? Clearly, as you go up that continuum of autonomic arousal, it becomes much harder to do whatever that means, right? Hence, the tools for reducing stress in real time. I think the one that we haven't emphasized so much on the podcast-- and by the way, thanks to some great therapy that was not voluntary, I was able to-- I was a wild kid. I was a wild, wild kid. I hung around wild kids, and things were pretty different then, and we worked it out. But I think nowadays, it's wonderful because I think people are more conscious of the need to understand their nervous system, their own psychology. That wasn't as common back then. In fact, I hid the fact that I had to do therapy for a long time, thinking, wow. Everyone's going to think I'm crazy. They did call me crazy. I think things have really changed. I think the last 20 years have brought about a profound shift in the way that we think about our own species and what our useful tools and practices. And I think that one of the things that is abundantly clear is that threshold for a stress response really is different for different people, different in different situations, but that it is something that can be practiced and elevated in terms of not getting near that trigger point through the types of practices that I talked about earlier. Getting more comfortable with adrenaline circulating in your system is what it's really about, frankly. But of course, it all starts with a good night's sleep, right? It's going to make you far less reactive. But of course, when you're stressed, that's often when you're not getting good sleep. So I think ultimately that our ability to-- as more emotional resilience and effective responses during triggering situations is really the consequence of practices of taking good care outside of those situations. And then of course, inevitably, there will be situations where people get triggered. And it's actually interesting to see the way that people behave online and the fact that many people, in fact, in science as well have literally lost their jobs for not being able to control their thumbs. We're in an odd time where there's the distancing of doing things online as opposed to in person where people somehow engage in saying things and doing things that they wouldn't in person. But I think that ultimately it's the consequence of good self care, and this gets actually back to some of the things that are covered in the Conti series. We hear about self care. We think that means massages, which are great, by the way. And we think that is about exercise, and that's wonderful. But much of self care is about really making sure that our nervous system is in the state that we need it to be in order to go about our day. And I think this is why morning routines and practices are so vital. I think that those set the stage for the emotional resilience. Those set the stage for avoiding getting triggered, so to speak. I don't think there's a lot that one can do in real time except perhaps physiological sighs. So sorry to give you a sort of empty answer. I'm not a pessimist on this front. But I think that ultimately, it's like saying, well, what if you have to scale the side of a building to get in and you locked yourself out? What can you do to prepare for that? Well, you can buy a ladder. But if you don't have a ladder, what you probably should do is be physically fit enough to climb up a railing or something like that and know how to pick a lock or something like that. So I think ultimately that it's the consequence of stuff that's done away from those triggering situations. Next question, please. How would you describe the brain activity of somebody when they're suddenly inspired, and how do you foster inspiration in your life? Well, I talked a little bit about this, but I will say that the best way to foster inspiration is in the words of the great Joe Strummer. They actually call it Strummer's law, no joke. No input, no output. I think one of the things that I've observed over and over again is that as much as we need to dedicate ourselves to our craft, to our families, to our friends, that ultimately our best ideas come from disparate experiences when we're not seeking a particular kind of input to get ideas. Now, maybe, this practice of being completely still while being alert fosters a lot of-- I think the way I understand it is more of a geysering up of stored information in the unconscious. That's how I think Rick would talk about it or Paul Conti would talk about it, as geysering up from the unconscious. Because when we are focused on the outside world, we're taking in sensory information, exteroception as opposed to interoception. Of course, that external sensory information-- that no input, no output-- is that those are the raw materials that our nervous system uses to construct ideas about anything. So my belief-- and this is a practice I do every week is I make sure that at least once a week I either walk or hike or run without any earphones. And I'm trying to get into states of wordlessness, states where I'm not digesting a podcast, where I'm not reading a book, where I'm not listening to a lecture, where I'm not in conversation, and essentially, trying to turn off the linguistic narrative. We are a storytelling species. We tend to take all of our internal and external experience and construct things around language. But spoken language is not the language of the nervous system. The language of the nervous system still remains to be identified. It's something else. For people that think in feels, it will certainly incorporate that. Spoken language, of course, is important, and we have some core structures to spoken language. We covered this in the podcast episode with my friend Eddie Chang. But ultimately the way to come up with new ideas or inspiration is going to be to collect the raw materials of experience and then give ourselves these periods, maybe even just five, 10 minutes-- you don't have to lay around half the day doing nothing still wide awake-- and give that those raw materials the opportunity to marinate and combine in whatever ways that are unique to you and then to geyser up. What inspiration looks like in the brain, we don't really know. There's awe. There are some studies about awe, but that's different. The word that better comes to mind is delight. Awe in my mind is something that we witness that sort of overwhelms our attention. Like, wow. Delight is when it somehow links up with our own internal narrative. Like, I have something to do with what's happening. I'm not just here to witness it. A really impressive fireworks show is like awe, but there's nothing to do about it. It doesn't relate to anything about you, really. You're purely a spectator. Whereas delight is when you see something and it somehow links to something in your emotional or personal history or how you're wired, that now there's something to do about it. That's inspiration. And we don't understand where that exists in the brain or what that looks like, but I think we all recognize that feeling when it happens, and it's oh so wonderful. OK. Next question, please. How can Canadians fight the seasonal depression? Winters are too long here. OK. Well, this gives me an opportunity to share with you what I think is one of the coolest things about our species. Notice I say that about many things. So we've talked about circadian rhythms, right? Sunrises, sunsets. And we get that information transmitted into our nervous system by looking at the sunrise. By the way, you don't have to watch the sun cross the horizon. It just needs to be low solar angle, low in the sky. Once it's overhead, it's a different signal. So low solar angle, that's what it's about. It's not necessarily about seeing the sun cross the horizon. By the way, someone the other day on my team said, won't you get cataracts if you look at the sun? Low solar angle sunlight is very unlikely to cause cataracts, especially if you're just doing it 10 to 30 minutes. The sun overhead is when it's quite bright. Yes, indeed, some people are going to be at risk for cataracts. So ophthalmologists in the audience can attack me for that one. But it was our chair of ophthalmology at Stanford that said it, so I'm going to trust him. OK. That's circadian, 24 hour rhythms. But there's also these circannual rhythms. So if you're at a fairly northern location on the planet, nights get very long. Days get short in winter. What happens then? Well, melatonin, the hormone of darkness, is essentially obliterated by sunlight. So what's happening when days are 12 hours long, you have very little melatonin, the duration of the melatonin signal is very short? Then as you proceed into the fall, days are getting shorter. Nights are getting longer. The duration of the melatonin signal is getting longer and longer. Then, of course, in winter, there's a lot more darkness. Melatonin signals are very long. Daylight signals are very short because the days are short. So you can say, OK. Well, that's obvious, thank goodness. But what that means is incredible. What that means is that you have a hormone, melatonin, that's secreted from your pineal gland, which Descartes called the seat of the soul because there's only one of them in the brain. I don't know how he up with that one. But the pineal secretes melatonin, and you suppress melatonin secretion with sunlight viewing. There's a couple of synapses in between the eye and the pineal, but it gets there up through the neck, basically, the cervical ganglia. What's wild, therefore, is that the location of the Earth around the sun and the tilt of the Earth is translated into a neural and then a hormonal signal in your brain, which to me is amazing. That literally means that the position of the Earth around the sun and its tilt are translated into a physiological signal that's working unconsciously to tell your brain and body what time of year it is. But it doesn't care what time of year it is. It cares about where you are in this orbit about the sun. So if you think about when days are, say, eight hours long in the fall versus eight hours long in the spring, what's different? What's different is how long the signal was the day before. So the seasonal depression we now know is the consequence of the melatonin signal getting longer, not an absolute duration of the melatonin signal. In other words, in the spring when a day is eight hours long, but yesterday, the day was seven hours and 48 minutes long, your brain has a memory of how much melatonin was released the day before, much more than that particular day. So it's a slow integrating clock. So this is a very roundabout way for me to teach you about the melatonin seasonal rhythm cycle and answer the question directly by saying, if you want to offset seasonal depression, what you want to do is extend the amount of bright light that you're getting in the morning slightly as days get shorter. But it's the extension of the bright light exposure-- and if you can't do that with sunlight because there's no sunlight because you live in Toronto, not Toronto, what you want to do is find some artificial source that you can look at in the morning before you leave your home. And I haven't talked much about this on the podcast because our listeners are extended it around the globe and not just in northern locations. But what this essentially means is getting maybe two to three minutes of bright light exposure as you're heading from fall into winter-- bright light from an artificial source. You do not need to purchase a so-called SAD lamp, one of these very expensive seasonal depression lamps. What I did was I purchased-- because I'm very sensitive to seasonal changes in light even though I don't live very far north. You can get a 900 lux drawing tablet. These are quite inexpensive. They're not zero cost, but quite inexpensive. And just put that on your desk or on wherever you make your coffee in the morning 90 minutes after you wake up-- this sort of thing. And just get five or so minutes before you leave the house. And then as you extend into the winter, you don't have to be neurotic about increasing the duration every day. Actually, the way these slow integrating clocks work, you could actually even just hold it a little bit closer each day. Don't burn your eyeballs out-- a little bit closer each day. But essentially, if you just dose yourself with a little bit more bright light early in the day as you extend into winter, that will essentially trick the melatonin system into thinking that you're going from eight hours into 10 hours of light as opposed to eight hours into six hours of light. OK? Very simple. And if you can't get one of these 900 lux tablets or something off a website, then you could do this with any bright incandescent bulb should work. Again, just be careful not to put it directly against your eyeball. OK. Next question, please. How do you increase neuroplasticity? Well, this is an opportunity to talk about something I should have said earlier, which is that ultimately, whether or not you are triggering neuroplasticity through elevated focus or whether or not you're taking high dose psilocybin-- your business, not mine. And we can talk about psychedelics if you want-- just decriminalized in California or soon to be decriminalized. [CHEERS] Cool. People are enthusiastic. Yeah. I've been pretty vocal about my belief that the data are really interesting, to say the least, about not microdosing. By the way, there's not a lot of evidence that microdosing is useful. I'm not saying it's not, but there not a lot of clinical trials showing that. But the two macro dose with effective therapeutic support trials are very encouraging not just for major depression but also for various eating disorders, alcohol use disorder, which is, by the way, the term that people are starting to shift to as opposed to alcoholism-- alcohol use disorder. Which is not to be politically correct, just so you understand what they're talking about when they're talking about alcohol use disorder. Whether or not psilocybin, whether or not it's MDMA, whether or not it's frustration brought about by your inability to play an instrument and your determination to do so, in the end, it's all about deployment of these neuromodulators, neuromodulators being some combination of dopamine, serotonin, acetylcholine, or epinephrine, again, usually in combination. What's very clear is that the neuroplastic effects of MDMA, the neuroplastic effects of psilocybin are brought about by huge increases in serotonin. This also can help us understand why, for some years, and to some extent still now, it was thought that the SSRIs, the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, would be good treatments for depression. I think some people, by the way, have experienced tremendous relief from the SSRIs. We don't want to demonize them. At the same time, it's very clear that depression is not simply low levels of serotonin. That's also not true, hence why there's effective, in some people, antidepressants like bupropion that increase dopamine and epinephrine and not serotonin. The point here is that these neuromodulators, as they're called, allow for what? They allow for modulation of synapses, which effectively allows for neuroplasticity. I mean, ultimately whether or not it's through talk therapy, Kundalini breathing, high dose psilocybin, MDMA, or the combination, which I think is called a hippy flip-- [LAUGHTER] Never done them together. I confess. Never done them together, but have done them with a clinician, by the way, in legal circumstances. And not a lot-- not often, that is. It's very clear that it's opening windows for plasticity. Now, what's intriguing, if we're going to just talk about psychedelics for a second, is why a drug like MDMA, which increases dopamine-- which, by the way, MDMA is methylenedioxymethamphetamine. Don't let anybody tell you it's something different. It's meth. It's meth. But it's meth with a lot of serotonin thrown in there, too. But it's meth. And it's clear that for the treatment of PTSD, it holds promise. It's not absolutely safe, especially for people with cardiac conditions. If you're going to go down that path, you want and need a skilled guide, and this is where I think the laws are really going to have to pay careful attention to who and what is a skilled guide, OK? And when it comes to psilocybin, the serotonin increase is what effectively causes broader connectivity in the brain. And what's interesting is that both of those drugs increase plasticity mainly through increases in serotonin but working on very different receptors. So they have different types and outputs of plasticity. What's interesting to me is that-- because I'm a strong believer that children should not be doing psychedelics nor should we be giving children psychedelics-- is that the increases in connectivity in the brain that are the consequence of playing a musical instrument, or ideally, an instrument with others as a child, mimic a lot of the broader scale connectivity, sort of so-called resting network connectivity, that occurs when people take psychedelics as adults. In other words-- and I can't emphasize this enough. And again, I failed at music miserably. I'll tell you a story about that in a second. Getting kids to play an instrument-- it's very clear it improves their ability to learn all sorts of things for their entire life. It's just so, so important. I don't really know what to do about this or who to shout at or talk to about keeping the arts active in schools and physical education. But the idea that we would just train kids in math is just frightening because if you want them to be truly good at math and science, you'd also have them play instruments. By the way, when I was a kid, I played the violin. My parents made me. It was not the instrument. I wanted to play, and we have only one picture. They taught me the Suzuki method. You're supposed to learn by ear. And there's one picture, and all the other kids have their bows up. And my bow is down, and I'm standing here on the stage, and my fly is down. And literally, the neighbor's dog howled, and I quit after that concert. So I was traumatized by it. They showed me the picture. My sister teased me relentlessly. So neuroplasticity-- figure out your choice way to increase a neuromodulator like serotonin or epinephrine, acetylcholine, or dopamine. I honestly would not encourage pharmacologic or psychedelic approaches as your primary entry point. I really don't. I think that there's a place for that in certain circumstances, but that would not be the primary entry point. Next question, please. What type of movement protocol do you recommend for somebody who is working from home sitting behind the computer from 8:00 AM to 5:00 PM. Oh. OK. Well, a couple of things. I mean, I can make all sorts of recommendations, like get up early and move, if you can take breaks and walk, this sort of thing. But let's assume that all of that is kind of understood, that there are certain forms of exercise that we should all be doing. I think now, it's very clear based on the beautiful work of Peter Attia, whose brother is in the audience, by the way, tonight. Yeah. [CHEERS] He's got a younger brother. He's got a younger brother. Can you imagine if Peter Attia was your older brother? Can you imagine? That'd be pretty cool. I sort of adopt people as siblings. They don't know it, but I do. But I just assume Peter was my older brother, but turns out he has a younger brother already. And Peter has essentially hammered home the truth, which is that we should all be getting somewhere between 150 to 200 minutes of so-called zone 2 cardio where we're walking a lot and/or moving about where we can just barely hold a conversation. I notice people in Toronto seem to walk a lot, so that's great. And then three days a week or so of resistance training, and there are a bunch of other mobility things that we should all do so that we don't fall and break our hips or another bone because that's another way that people really limit their health span and life span and so on and so forth. But two things that can make being at a desk-- which I loathe. Even though I like to learn, I hate sitting still. You can do the standing desk thing. I do that by stacking boxes. The other thing that was interesting-- did anyone see this study out of the University of Texas? I think it was Houston this last year about the soleus push up. Did anyone see this? This is pretty interesting. So the soleus, this wider flat muscle below the gastrocnemius of the calf, is a really unique muscle in the human body. It's 1% of the total human musculature, but it has an ability-- what will soon be for obvious reasons-- to dramatically shift fuel utilization in the body. What they did in this study was they had people who were sitting for three or four hours a day just simply raise their heel. Seems almost silly, right? They call it a soleus push up. When I called it that online, I literally got attacked by the gym bros telling me that's a seated calf raise. OK? OK. No wonder this whole bro science thing gets kind of-- people get really aggressive. They lift their heel, and they're pushing their toe down. And some people think of it as bouncing the knee, but it's really about pushing the toe down and lifting the heel. So they just simply had these sedentary people do this heel raise. And what they saw was that there was a dramatic, highly statistically significant increase in blood glucose utilization and reduction in both insulin levels during that activity and around the clock. Really interesting. What they were doing was mimicking some aspect of walking. Now, is it as good as walking? No. But if you are stuck behind-- working from home, sitting behind the computer from 8:00 AM to 5:00 PM, what they found was that people getting into this unconscious pattern of lifting their heel over and over and shifting back and forth mimicked a lot of the effects of walking. It's not a replacement for exercise, but the shifts in glucose and insulin utilization and output respectively were very impressive. And this group down at the University of Houston at University of Texas in Houston is starting to incorporate this into people who have limited mobility. And it doesn't seem like other limb movements can do this. There's something special about the soleus. It was designed, in air quotes, to be a muscle that's used repeatedly over extended hours of time and that has this unique pathway of fuel utilization. So is it going to cure obesity? No. But if you're stuck behind a desk, that would be something useful. I have this little fidget thing. I was too lazy to build one, but I found one online for a couple of bucks where you just when you stand at your desk and just kind of kick it back and forth. Anyone seen these? These are kind of cool. Then you just kind of kick them back and forth. And some people will treadmill at the desk. I can't do that. I can't do that many things. But I also am still working on this one. I can't quite do that. Next question, please. My morning meditation consists of-- OK. And then I think we're about out of time. Yeah. So my morning meditation is not really a meditation, it's a perceptual exercise. And that perceptual exercise has a weird name because I gave it a weird name. And I didn't intend to sound mystical, and I don't want credit for it. But I call it space time bridging, but it's not that. To me, one of the most interesting things about the nervous system is our ability to orient in different time domains. This gets a little bit abstract. But we know from states of high stress that we start fine slicing time. We know this, right? The world becomes like a slow motion video because frame rate has increased. As a vision neuroscientist, I can tell you that in my laboratory, we were doing studies with virtual reality where we can crank up people's level of stress by giving them certain visual stimuli, and then their ability to parse information is clearly increasing in the time domain. They're fine slicing much in the same way that when you look at a slow motion video of somebody dunking a basketball or something of that sort, it's because the frame rate went up. So when we are in high alertness states, our frame rate increases. When we're very relaxed, our frame rate decreases. So if you're Rick Rubin and you're lying there looking at the sky, your frame rate is probably slower than if you're hyper focused on-- oh my goodness. Imagine a dreadful situation where somebody sends you a text message. Well, let's make it positive. Somebody is having a child in your family. And you're like, is it healthy? Are mom and baby OK? Dot, dot, dot. I mean, seconds feel like minutes. Minutes feel like hours because you're fine slicing time. OK? And then mom and baby are fine. OK, great. Happy story ending. Great. So when we're very relaxed, we tend to bend time more broadly. Now, it's also true that your visual system and your perception of time are inextricably linked such that if you close your eyes and you focus on your internal state, you are fine slicing time. And the second hand, if you will, is more or less-- the metronome, rather, is your breathing and your heart rate combined. When you open your eyes and you look at something in your immediate environment, when you move from so-called interoception to exteroception, your perception of time shifts fairly dramatically, and you now perceive time according to, believe it or not, the speed of images moving in your environment relative to you. And then as you look out further on to, say, the horizon, you extend the time domain even more. If you then imagine yourself in the whole globe, you extend your time domain even more. So my morning meditation, if you will-- it's more of a perceptual exercise-- is to step through these different time domains, to close my eyes and focus on my internal state, open my eyes and focus on something close by, look a little bit further, look a bit further, think about myself on the globe, the whole world moving. So you're really extending your space domain, and then the time domain expands with it. And this comes up when you see these little memes of, anytime you're worried, just remember you're a little dot on a little blue spinning in the universe, this kind of thing. But you don't think that way when you're stressed. You're thinking, I'm the blue dot. You're the problem. Whatever. Or I want that. You're not thinking. So this perceptual exercise is a way of training my nervous system to shift deliberately between these different time domains. And for me, it's been very useful for improving task switching, something that, as you probably have noticed, I'm not very good at. I go into the trench. I don't leave the trench very easily. So that's been very useful. And if you are interested in more detail, there's a wonderful book called The Secret Pulse of Time. And there's a Hitchcock movie that's discussed in that book. The movie is about 75 minutes long. And during the course of that movie, the background actually includes rising and setting of the sun and a bunch of different speeds of movement and interplay between the characters. And your perception at the end of the movie is that a much, much longer period of time occurred because unconsciously, your brain was paying attention to these circadian signals and these other signals. Absolutely fascinating with Hitchcock. Not a huge Hitchcock fan, but after seeing that, I was like, wow. That's genius. He captured this space time thing. What you see out the window is in one time domain. In the room is a difference time domain. I won't tell you who killed who. But it's very, very interesting. And so the point being that when your visual system is up close, focusing on things up close or internally, you're fine slicing. When you focus on things further away, you're more broadly focusing and so on and so forth. So that's a morning meditation I do-- perceptual exercise. It only takes about a minute or so. The other thing is that on the monitors, they're flashing now. That was your last question. So I want to just say a couple of things before we go. First of all, thanks to all of you who stood out the night for the long duration. I realize this stuff is nerdy detailed, and there are a lot of other things you could be doing with your evening and your time. And so I'm very grateful that you all came together tonight for this what I like to think was a discussion. I also just want to thank everyone for your interest in the podcast. It is a labor of love. I'm highly dependent on my team for doing all of it. I don't do it alone by any stretch. But as much as it might seem like it's me talking to all of you, it really is about all of you. That's the reason I do it, and I'm ever so grateful. And I'd certainly be remiss if I didn't say thank you for your interest in science. [APPLAUSE]

========================================

--- Video 170 ---
Video ID: W5zqC5cYcS0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5zqC5cYcS0
Title: How Tone of Voice Shapes Emotional State of Listeners
Published: 2023-11-14 21:36:41 UTC
Description:
In a recent Huberman Lab episode, my guest was Chris Voss, a former FBI hostage negotiator. During the episode, we discuss how the tone of speaking voice shapes the emotional tone of an entire conversation and why a low-frequency, calm voice creates a calm state in the listener and a calm, rational conversation.

Regardless of whether your voice is high or low or somewhere in between, this information can be applied to have more effective conversations of all kinds.

It all boils down to how the neurons in the auditory cortex respond to low-frequency sounds — they essentially create a low-frequency oscillation pattern within the listener.

The episode also focuses on how to detect lies, the essential features of benevolent negotiations and more.

Watch the full episode on YouTube: https://youtu.be/q8CHXefn7B4

Transcript Language: English
Low frequency sounds of the sort that your voice is that late night FM DJ voice are responded to in the brain by neurons, no surprise there, but the frequency that those neurons fire is also low frequency. In other words, when you speak in your low voice. Right. The other person's brain hears that and starts firing in a low frequency tone. In other words, it entrains to your voice, not just the timing, but it's actually like you're essentially playing an emotional piano down in the low keys of their-- Oh, right. Of their mind. Now, when you go up to the high frequencies, the neurons can't follow that high frequency. So there's something special about low frequency sound that actually changes the emotional tone of the people that hear that low frequency sound.

========================================

--- Video 171 ---
Video ID: EhlIkzJwPlk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EhlIkzJwPlk
Title: Dr. Natalie Crawford: Female Hormone Health, Fertility & Vitality
Published: 2023-11-13 13:00:16 UTC
Description:
In this episode, my guest is Natalie Crawford, MD, a double board-certified physician specializing in obstetrics and gynecology, fertility and reproductive health and host of the “As a Woman” podcast. We discuss female hormones, nutrition, supplementation, reproductive health, and fertility, including how the timing and duration of puberty impact a woman’s long-term hormone cycles and menopause. We also discuss the pros and cons of various birth control methods and how hormonal vs. non-hormonal birth control each affects fertility. We cover the factors that impact egg and sperm quality and how to leverage timing for conception. We also discuss procedures to assess female fertility, including egg count and hormone testing, the process of egg freezing, in vitro fertilization (IVF) and other reproductive options. This episode represents fairly comprehensive coverage of female hormones and reproductive health, highlighting important tests and screening, behavioral, nutritional, supplement and prescription-based tools that women of any age can use to improve their fertility, hormone function and overall health. 

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Maui Nui: https://mauinuivenison.com/huberman 
Helix Sleep: https://helixsleep.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman 
Momentous: https://livemomentous.com/huberman 

Dr. Natalie Crawford
As a Woman podcast: https://www.nataliecrawfordmd.com/podcast 
Website: https://www.nataliecrawfordmd.com 
Fora Fertility clinical practice: https://www.forafertility.com 
Pinnacle: https://pinnacle-conference.com 
Courses: https://www.nataliecrawfordmd.com/courses 
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/nataliecrawfordmd 
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/c/NatalieCrawfordMD  
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/nataliecrawfordmd 
X: https://twitter.com/ncrawfordmd 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@nataliecrawfordmd 
Pinterest: https://www.pinterest.com/nataliecrawfordmd
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/natalie-crawford-md-8a56021a0

Articles
Oral contraceptive use in women changes preferences for male facial masculinity and is associated with partner facial masculinity: https://bit.ly/40Ecami
Intake of protein-rich foods in relation to outcomes of infertility treatment with assisted reproductive technologies: https://bit.ly/47bjKXK

Other Resources
INVOcell Same-Sex Couple: https://bit.ly/479R4P4

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Natalie Crawford
00:01:40 Sponsors: Maui Nui Venison & Helix Sleep; The Brain Body Contract
00:04:59 Female Puberty & Growth Characteristics, Height
00:13:27 Eggs & Ovulation, Harvesting Eggs, In Vitro Fertilization (IVF)
00:17:31 Endocrine Disruptors, Fetal Development
00:21:39 Lavender, Tea Tree & Evening Primrose Oils, Scents, Diapers
00:25:13 Breast Milk vs. Formula & Fertility
00:26:04 Menstruation Cycle & Hormones, Timing
00:34:08 Sponsor: AG1
00:35:59 Estrogen, Progesterone & Menstrual Cycle
00:38:08 Hormonal Birth Control & Ovarian Reserve, AMH Testing, Fertility
00:42:42 Spermatogenesis & Testosterone; Heat: Ovaries vs Testes
00:46:11 Period & Pregnancy, Conception Window
00:48:56 Estrogen, Libido & Ovulation; Mittelschmerz
00:51:33 Tool: Intercourse Timing & Conception; Artificial Insemination, IVF
00:55:03 Egg/Sperm Quality, Cigarettes, Vaping, Cannabis & Alcohol 
01:02:20 Sponsor: InsideTracker
01:03:29 Intrauterine Device (IUD), Depo-Provera & Fertility
01:10:00 Birth Control Risks & Benefits, Cancers, Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome (PCOS)
01:19:39 Blood Clotting & Birth Control Pill; Health Screening 
01:24:50 Tool: AMH Testing, Ovarian Reserve, Antral Follicle Count Ultrasound
01:29:55 IVF, In Vitro Maturation (IVM); Early Ovarian Reserve Screening
01:35:40 Tools: Egg Freezing, IVF; Age & Egg Quality
01:43:37 Egg Freezing & IVF Procedures, Maternal Age, Success Rates
01:51:30 Tool: Sperm Freezing & Paternal Age, Vasectomy
01:55:01 Hormones, Egg Freezing & IVF
02:00:42 Three-Parent IVF, Mitochondrial DNA
02:05:21 IVF Embryo Storage & Donation; Donor Education & Consent
02:14:29 Autism, Developmental Disorders, IVF Babies, Age 
02:20:36 Tools: Sleep, Nutrition & Fertility; Dietary Fat
02:27:32 Protein, Meat, Tofu, Fish; Sugar, Artificial Sweeteners; Weight & Miscarriage
02:37:38 Tools: Supplements; Prenatal Vitamins, Omega 3s, Vitamin D, Coenzyme Q10
02:42:26 L-Carnitine & Male Fertility; PCOS & Myo-inositol; Metformin
02:47:11 Egg Retrieval, Ovarian Hyperstimulation Syndrome, Minimal Stimulation
02:57:56 INVOcell
03:03:12 Egg Freezing, Intracytoplasmic Sperm Injection (ICSI), Sperm Fragmentation
03:11:45 Genetic Testing, IVF Transfer & Success Rate, Embryo Banking
03:15:10 Menopause
03:19:47 Hormone Replacement Therapy & Menopause
03:22:25 Early-signs of Menopause
03:25:18 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, YouTube Feedback, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

#HubermanLab #HormoneHealth #Fertility

Disclaimer: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine my guest today is Dr Natalie Crawford Dr Natalie Crawford is a medical doctor specializing in Obstetrics and Gynecology reproductive endocrinology and infertility she also holds a degree in nutrition science Dr Crawford runs a clinical practice seen patients daily as well as being actively involved in public education both through social media and through her popular podcast entitled as a woman today Dr Crawford teaches us about all aspects of female hormones and Hormone Health and fertility beginning as far back as in utero when we were still in our mother's womb and extending as far forward as menopause we discussed topics such as the timing of puberty and what the timing of puberty in girls means for their fertility and we discussed birth control both hormonal and non- hormonal forms of birth control and how birth control may or may not relate to long-term fertility and different aspects of female Health we also talk extensively about measuring fertility that is egg count we also talk about egg retrieval AKA freezing one's eggs as well as invitro fertilization and we also take a deep dive into the popular and important topics of nutrition and supplementation as they relate to fertility as they relate to pregnancy but also how they relate to female hormone Health generally indeed Dr Crawford provides us with a master class on female hormones and fertility one that I know that all women ought to benefit from and that men would benefit from listening to as well before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is Maui Nei venison Maui NE venison is the most nutrient-dense and delicious red meat available I've spoken before on this podcast in Solo episodes and with guests about the need to get approximately 1 gram of highquality protein per pound of body weight each day for optimal nutrition now there are many different ways that one can do that but a key thing is to make sure that you're not doing that by ingesting excessive calories Maui Nei venison has the highest density of quality protein per calorie and it achieves that in delicious things like like ground Meats venison steaks jerky and bone broth I particularly like the ground venison I make those into venison burgers probably five times a week or more I also like the jerky for its convenience especially when I'm traveling or I'm especially busy with work and know that I'm getting an extremely nutrient-dense highquality source of protein if you'd like to try Maui Nei venison you can go to Maui Nei venison do.com huberman and get 20% off your first order again that's mauii venison doc / huberman to get 20% off today's episode is also brought To Us by Helix sleep Helix sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are tailored to your unique sleep needs now sleep is the foundation of mental health physical health and performance when we are sleeping well and enough mental health physical health and performance all stand to be at their best one of the key things to getting a great night's sleep is to make sure that your mattress is tailor to your unique sleep needs Helix sleep has a brief two-minute quiz that if you go to their website you take that quiz and answer questions such as do you tend to sleep on your back your side or your stomach do you tend to run hot or cold in the middle of the night maybe you don't know the answers to those questions and that's fine at the end of that two-minute quiz they will match you to a mattress that's ideal for your sleep needs I sleep on the dusk DUS us mattress and when I started sleeping on a dusk mattress about 2 years ago my sleep immediately improved so if you're interested in upgrading your mattress go to helixsleep.com huberman take their 2-minute sleep quiz and they'll match you to a customized mattress for you and you'll get up to $350 off any mattress order and two free pillows again if interested go to helixsleep.com huberman for up to $350 off and two free pillows I'm pleased to announce that we will be hosting four live events in Australia Each of which is entitled The Brain body contract during which I will share science and science related tools for mental health physical health and performance there will also be a Live question and answer session we have limited tickets still available for the event in Melbourne on February 10th as well as the event in Brisbane on February 24th our event in Sydney at the Sydney Opera house sold out very quickly so as a consequence we've now scheduled a second event in Sydney at the aware super theater on February 18th to access tickets to any of these events you can go to huberman lab.com events and use the code huberman at checkout I hope to see you there and as always thank you for your interest in science and now for my discussion with Dr Natalie Crawford Dr craw welcome thank you so much for having me I'm honored to be here well I've been paying attention to your content for a long time and I find it to be incredibly clear informative and for many people actionable so today I'd like to talk about both fertility and of course hormones but as we both know fertility is not limited to a discussion about hormones it actually relates to things like behaviors yes sex behaviors and other behaviors nutrition supplementation so we'll get into all of but if we could just back up developmentally and talk a little bit about female puberty because I think pretty much everything we'll talk about today is related to what happens puberty forward mostly in females but we will also discuss male fertility and hormones a bit and the question I have is is there anything about a woman's timing or let's just say patterns of puberty right how frequently they menstruate early on what the timing of menstration is uh in terms of their age Etc that provides hints or maybe even facts or directives about her future fertility or how long her fertility might last this is a great question and I think defining some terminology before we begin is helpful so if we go all the way back to when you're a fetus inside your mom so when there's a female fetus inside your mom you have the most eggs you're ever going to have at about 20 weeks gestation you have about six to seven million eggs by the time you're born you've already lost more than half of those and you continually lose eggs all the time so the analogy that I always use and you do too is imagining that there's a vault inside the ovary where all your eggs are kept and every single month since the moment you have an ovary you lose a group of these eggs and when there's more inside you're losing more so you're losing all of these eggs throughout early fetal development and then up until the time period even of puberty when you reach puberty you have a lessening of the number of eggs in your ovary to the point where it can start to respond to the signals from the brain so we think about puberty onset and females first we have really thearchy which is the development of breasts so that happens about two years on average before you have minarchy which is your period starting so what happens is the brain as we know from the hypo L sends out G&R and then we have FSH coming out which really starts to stimulate those follicles so FSH or follicle stimulating hormone well-named hormone for the female of course men have it too and it's less well- named for them but it starts to get those follicles which house the eggs to grow and make estrogen women have about two years of estrogen exposure alone so unopposed estrogen with no progesterone because they're not yet ovulating and that's when you start to see breast budding and you start to see the development of some of those secondary sex characteristics before you actually have a period what are some of the other secondary sex characteristics that precede menarchy um so you said uh breast Bud development and then breast development on average about two years before years before you have sexual hair development so actually adrin Archy is one of the first usually comes right before at the same time with breast buds so two to three years before you'll see your period And so genital hair underarm hair ex yeah genital hair usually first and then underarm hair um and uh we're getting right down into the weeds here which is good um you know a goal of this podcast is to normalize all aspects of Health including sexual health and and reproductive Health um is that commencer it also with um the development of body odor yes you know because as a young boy who eventually hit puberty and became a young man and now I suppose I'm in middle age um 48 um I can tell you that the the locker room smelled a lot different um be before and after Middle School right right like the in other words boys start to smell stinky um right they do yes and that's usually around that same time of sexual hair development is when you start to have those glands around the hair making some of those odors that start to produce stink do they reflect hormones themselves not this like the smell the actual smell doesn't actually reflect levels of hormones or anything like that it is just that your body your gonads whether it is test SE or ovaries are now starting to respond to those brain signals the brain is turned on they're starting to respond and your body is starting to mature in a way to get to the point where it can support reproduction the reason I asked that question is not to get people thinking about um stinky smells but um and by the way some people love the musty smell of of their own uh armpits or others you know we're referring to adults um by the way um but the reason I ask is that there's a wealth of data in animal models including non-human primates suggesting that um exposure to the odors of others can either um stimulate or accelerate puberty um is there any evidence for that in humans so there's mild evidence and it's murky because we also know that anything that could be an endocrine disruptor which a lot of scents or fragrances are also can accelerate the onset of puberty by disrupting part of this system and so we know that tox toxins and you know scents and a lot of the world that we're exposed to is part of the reason why we're seeing puberty happening at such a younger age now in females specifically but in both but in females than we have before we have young girls seeing their onset of menarchy or their period at a much younger age how much younger I I've seen the various graphs for different countries but can we say that you know 10 years ago on average um girls in the United States and Northern Europe were getting menarchy at about what 12 to 13 years of age yeah so you know start we'll use menarchy for the purpose of this so having your period you know 10 to 20 years ago you will see most data would say oh 13 to 15 would have been kind of the average age and now we're really seeing it shift to be starting at 10 to 11 and completing by 1314 so most girls are definitely going through the puberty change earlier and the other thing to note is that most girls get their final growth right before they start their period too so not only are we seeing a change in this getting starting earlier what we're also seeing is probably some reduction in height from having gone through puberty at an earlier process because once you start actually menstrating once the ovaries have really started to learn how to respond to that FSH and grow the follicle and it gets to the point where you can start ovulating so about two years later then that ovulatory period those high levels of estrogen are going to go and they're going to close those growth plates so you've really started to limit your final adult height as well when you go through puberty earlier and that's definitely something that's a huge concern for precocious puberty or very young puberty right and we can use blockers when there are children who start to exhibit signs of puberty and one of the main reasons people do that is to try to get them to a greater adult height if they're really starting to go through puberty at a very young age is that also true for males that it's happening earlier that earlier puberty means that your growth spurt uh in terms of height is going to be uh truncated not the same and you probably most men will say oh but I had my growth spur you know kind of after I started having some of the puberty change that happened but because it is this estrogen related process and women that we see that gross bir really your final height is within that year of when your period starts interesting yeah this uh this discussion is certainly not about me but I was one of these what I thought was kind of an odd duck I hit puberty about 134 um let's just say I knew I did um but I didn't shave until I was after college my growth spurt between freshman and sophomore year I grew a foot right so I was like you know grew a full foot but I was the same weight so I was like real tall real skinny or pretty tall you know real skinny and then it seems like um you know some people in my life would argue that puberty is still occurring for me it feels like it's very long and protracted which leads me to a a a um very specific question um if puberty arrives let's again Define as menarchy um for sake of our discussion right now if puberty arrives early in a girl does that mean that her fertility will shut down earlier as well great question it does not so the age of which you start the onset of your period does not impact how long you're going to have a reproductive lifespan and that's because you have the eggs inside that Vault you're losing them every month no matter what so you lost them all those years before your period started no matter if your period came at 10 or at 15 it's just about when did they start allowing your body to ovulate determined by being able to carry a baby your body now thinks you can be pregnant I think this is so important to highlight because it puts together what you said earlier about the loss of eggs even in um as a fetus um I think most people sort of assume that the reduction in egg count is due to obious ulation and the fact that you know one egg ovulates typically but that other eggs are deployed in that ovulatory cycle and then those those basically are taken out of the Vault and out of the opportunity for fertilization but what you're saying is that the eggs are constantly being cull From the Vault starting from early embryonic development and that ovulation is a distinct step in some sense unrelated to to to the loss of eggs I think this is going to be very important for our discussion later about potential egg Harvest yes because I think some people have it in mind a lot of misconceptions that you're losing eggs from your Vault and that's not the case you're just accessing the ones outside gosh so you're not um so we can just answer this now perhaps it seems if I understand correctly that if one were to harvest eggs for IVF or for embryogenesis in addition to set them aside later or freeze them for later um if they want to use them eggs or or fertilized embryos that one is not reducing the total number of eggs any more than they would had they just let their their Cycles proceed naturally exactly that's such an important point I think that I think a lot of people believe the opposite they it's probably the number one thing that patients fear when they come talk to me about egg freezing or going through IVF is I don't want to harm my future fertility I don't want to cause myself to run out of eggs earlier or going into menopause earlier and it's explaining this process to them that your ovaries are on a pathway that you can't change those eggs are coming out of the Vault regardless of if you're on birth control pills you're pregnant we do IVF what we're modifying is one's not going to ovulate and have the rest of them die we're going to try to give you medication to get them all to grow so we can take all of the ones that have been released from the Vault that month and give them a chance for later and the next month you'll have another group come out so IVF is not about stimulating hyper relase or excessive release of eggs it's about stimulating the growth both of the ones that have been released so that they can be Frozen as stage either for later fertilization or fertilized in addition than Frozen as embryos is that right exactly and we just use the hormones that your body normally makes in a different way the medications we use are FSH and LH to get the eggs to grow so people will say I don't want to take all these weird hormones or strange medications but we're just manipulating that normal process that happens in the natural menstrual cycle in order to say hey this month let's get all these eggs to grow let's try to improve the efficiency of finding which eggs are going to be normal or not and help you along this process I think a good number of people are now going to uh head to the IVF Clinic I think again I really want to highlight this I I think most people that I've spoken to assume that the process of harvesting eggs for freezing for fertilization then or later is going to diminish their fertility because they're basically pulling more out of the savings account so to speak right okay so you're making the withdrawal no matter what great well um such an important point for for people to know and and propagate um getting back to puberty uh a little bit later on I wanted to get into endocrine disruptors and things of that sort but since you brought it up um you know I've heard things such as okay things like evening primrose oil if Mom is putting evening primrose oil on or has it in her shampoo that I've heard of young males getting um precocious breast Bud development keep in mind folks that some transient breast Bud development is um characteristic of some normal puberties in males it sometimes shows up and goes I knew some kids like that in the neighborhood they got teased a little bit and then they stopped getting teased hopefully nowadays they don't tease those kids but when I was growing up those kids got teased not by me but by other people but it was normal in it passed for for some right it occurred um normally and then passed but I've heard that things like exposure to evening primrose oil maybe even just through contact with Mom can um increase the the frequency or degree of that male breast Bud development is it also true that young girls can undergo precocious puberty or let's just say accelerated or exacerbated puberty um through contact with things like evening primrose oil which is a I think has some pseudo estrogen like properties it's important to differentiate that the secondary sex characteristics we see like breast Bud development are from estrogen but it's not really puberty being initiated when it's from an endocrine disrupting chemical so taking you know being exposed to evening primrose or lavender or tea tree oil o in a male isn't going to cause him to start to go into puberty but it is going to expose him to estrogen when his body is not and therefore stimulate some breast bed development same thing can happen in young girls meaning they could show some of those secondary sex signs earlier than they normally would and this is why if that's happening at a really young age kids should go to a pediatric endocrinologist who are going to check things like bone age and see if you've really started the puberty process or not or is it an outside exposure which is causing it interestingly about the young child exposure and development the other thing to say that's really interesting and relevant in my field is that when we think about how many eggs are in the vault and everybody's born with this different number and I'm sure we'll talk about ovarian reserve what we now know is that the Vault your ovaries are most susceptible to whatever your mother does when she's pregnant with you and that that epigenetic that programming which is happening is predisposing young women to probably having some of them low ovarian reserve some of them having diseases we associate with infertility like PCOS or endometriosis and we haven't yet characterized what all they are but if we look at the incidence of some of these disease that we see now what we do know is that the time period of which these people were pregnant the 80s and 90s was not the healthiest time when it comes to endocrine disruptors and plastic exposures and chemicals and all of this processed stuff let's just say that people have been exposed to that we're really seeing that those that ovarian susceptibility to egg quality and quantity happens in that fetal development period it's interesting uh because there are some uh parallels to male fetal development like the the fact that you have these or early organized izing effects of hormones like dihydrotestosterone which essentially stimulate the growth of the penis but also then establish a a propensity for hormones during puberty to activate growth of the sex organs but also activate the brain areas they're responsible for a host of different things so I only mention that because uh what I'd like to kind of illustrate in the background here is that um basically our reproductive Health begins really prior prior to conception really it's a dependent on M and Dad but um certainly to a great degree on on mom um but then fetal development is going to be important so sort of um us uh being able to pick our parents um I I do have a couple questions about lavender tea tree oil and evening primrose oil I was aware that evening Prim o oil oil excuse me can um somehow bind estrogen receptors it or mimic uh some of the estrad or something similar to it I wasn't aware of tea tree oil or lavender um here are we talking about oils what about Aromas and how concerned do people have to be about this stuff because I mean you know you'll go into a restaurant bathroom they'll be poer uh some people wear perfume I mean we don't want to set a paranoia but but I but I think people should know about this stuff tetri is in a lot of those um natural shampoos bur yes the one that tingle your scalps some people love them though constant exposure is very different than a onetime handwashing in the bathroom and I think that's the big difference for everything when we talk about chemicals or toxins or exposures in the world you can't live in a toxin-free world but choosing what you put in and on your body on a regular basis does set the tone for certain physiological changes and so you know using unscented products especially with children is really an important thing because we want to make sure that their lifetime exposure to some of these things especially during critical times is much less and so you'll see people recommend things like your laundry detergent you know what sensor in your laundry detergent the shampoo and conditioner are a big one and the Soaps that you use on a day-to-day basis in your house or the oils you put on your body Lavender is huge because there's this whole community of people they want to rub lavender oil on their baby's feet and help them sleep but really we can see and if somebody goes and shadows a pediatric endocrinologist for a day they'll see some kids come in and this will be the reason and why uh what about cloth diapers versus non- cloth diapers i' I've heard you know that you have your like very strong cloth drier proponents right and that because they seem to um feel or believe that um non- cloth diapers somehow contain things that can get into baby's skin and and maybe there's a bigger question here is baby skin more permeable than adult don't know that baby skin is more perme I don't either I just to me it seems it seems like it' be hard to imagine it is but but babies do seem to have this incredible skin right their skin is so smooth and you want to squeeze their cheeks and all this kind of stuff but um yeah the idea they would be more permeable I think it's more that their development is this time is very important and setting the stage for a lot of what happens later versus in adulthood those stepwise developmental processes have already happened so I think that's why we pay so much attention to what happens in the you know childhood period of time because we're now learning about those later consequences of what you're exposed to it's not that you know regular diapers versus cloth whatever we want to say one's necessarily better than the other it's more honestly a personal preference babies are exposed to them a lot and there's been a lot of attention to that but similarly somebody could use cloth and wash it with a detergent that then you know has certain chemicals in it so there hasn't been a study shown that this one thing is an exposure for a baby that somebody needs to be worried about there's definitely companies now which are promoting and talking about you know traditional diapers that they are making sure have less toxins in them and I always think anytime you can decrease toxin exposure to a child is going to be very important is there any evidence for um you know breast milk versus Formula in terms of impact on future reproductive development of or reproductive status of of a child that's a complicated question because breast mil milk exposure at least for the first 6 months of a child's life certainly helps with the immune system development and we know that poor immune development can lead to higher risk of autoimmune disease later what people call leaky gut and some of those diseases certainly are correlated with fertility so I wouldn't say we've gone so far to say that if you don't breastfeed your child they're going to have fertility issues but we do know that there's an in between correlation with things that breastfeeding is protective against and how those diseases themselves May relate to fertility in the female later on okay okay so if we're um thinking about a young girlwoman because we're talking about puberty right so I don't know what the exact nomenclature is there you know my experience is I'll I'll offend and um somebody no matter what um but a girl who under goes puberty right so a young woman um who's maybe 13 or so so she's early teens um under goes puberty and therefore is continuing to lose eggs from the Vault um but now is undergoing uh presumably roughly every 28 days manarchy but let's talk about this 28 days thing because I think a lot of people think that um quote unquote normal menstruation is always 28 days and and we know that's not true so what is the the range of uh normal durations between um menstration uh Cycles or duration of the menstruation cycle and let's also Define when the menstration cycle starts probably for the males mostly in the audience sure sure so let's think through the cycle we'll do a quick one over and then answer the questions so what we think of is cycle day one or when you're going to say this starts is going to be the day that you start bleeding so that's actually shedding the endometrial lining from what grew the last time so any spotting even would be considered day one okay so it is we can get back to it but there's problematic if you have a lot of spotting before that full flow starts a day or so can be really normal just as the body is adjusting to the drop in progesterone but let's just start at the beginning day one you have a period of Menses this is when you're actually bleeding at this time period we like to think about all of those new eggs being out of the Vault being susceptible to that FSH which of course is that well-named hormone because it stimulates a follicle to grow and each egg is in a follicle that egg starts to grow and makes estrogen that estrogen stimulates the proliferation of the lining of the uterus and preparation for potentially that pregnancy that may come and also that estrogen makes you feel really great right that's the follicular phase name so because that follicle is growing and it's an FSH dominant phase where you have a lot of estrogen and people feel great when they have a lot of estrogen because women feel good with estrogen because of the relationship between estrogen and other neuromodulators like dopamine serotonin and and is that happening in parallel or are they somehow related like is estrogen controlling the release of Serotonin somehow and vice versa or are they just kind of coincidently happening in parallel we definitely think that there's more of a correlation causation than just coincidence because we know there's time periods of people are more depressed within your cycle correlating with those low estrogen levels and we know that when you go into menopause or you run out of eggs and you're now in a low estrogen phase we see a lot more of a depressed mood and you know anadon lack of response to things which would normally give you pleasure happens more frequently the female brain loves estrogen and it's protective against things like dementia so this is a time period where women are going to be more energetic they're going to have more energy more Focus this is the estrogen dominant phase of the cycle and when you have seen that estrogen at its high levels which it's only made from a mature follicle and it's very specific 200 pams per milliliter for 50 hours that's the brain's clue okay we must have a mature egg and it can send out that surge of LH or lutenizing hormone and now you ovulate and when you ovulate the follicle opens up releases closes back and then it's the Corpus ludum and we've entered the ludal phase and the Corpus ludum as the name suggests a corpus it's like a body that's basically the it's Bas it's basically the the corpse of of what yeah in sheath the egg before um and it what I find so amazing I mean biology so beautiful right it instead of just taking that tissue and saying okay like let's just discard this or um that becomes the trigger for the next phase of the it is essential for life right the Corpus ludum which makes progesterone opens and closes the implantation window it is what allows somebody to get pregnant and for our species to continue it's so it's extremely fascinating and that Corpus ludum gets stimulated to produce progesterone imp pulses throughout the entire ludal phase because it's still controlled by the brain unless you get pregnant and then in that ludal phase progesterone is fascinating it's trying to protect you from things which could potentially harm your baby so suddenly now you have less energy you want to sleep more you want to eat more you maybe do not want to have sex as much because your body is suddenly saying let's just protect this potential implantation that you're going to have if that pregnancy doesn't come the Corpus ludum can only live 12 to 14 days it has a very distinct lifespan and then it dies your estrogen and progesterone both drop you bleed starting over the next cycle and a new group of follicles comes out to be released and the reason why walking through that very succinctly but is important when you're asking how long is the normal cycle because the ludal phase is pretty set at 12 to 14 days the follicular phase can vary in person to person and what we know though is for one individual if your menstrual cycle your reproductive hormones are working right it should be relatively constant for you and so if your periods are every 24 days but they've always been every 24 to 25 days then that's not concerning and if your periods are every 33 days but they've always been every 33 days then that's not concerning but we do get concerned when there's a change in your period or we get concerned when people have what I like to say is irregularly regular periods because what you'll see textbooks tell you is that your periods could be as short short as 21 days as long as 35 days and that can all be normal but people will hop between them and they'll have one cycle that is 24 days in length from day one to the last day before the next day one then the next cycle is 32 and then it's 26 and then it's 34 and that's not normal that's too irregular and that can be a sign that something is not communicating correctly within your reproductive hormones so what I tell patients is in general your period should be less than 35 days apart and you should be able to look at a calendar and with your finger put a finger on the date and within a couple days of accuracy be able to predict when your period's coming and if you can't there could likely be something that is interfering with the hormonal signals between the brain and the ovary and one of the biggest really one of the only things we see as women start to have fewer eggs in the vault is a shortening of their cycle so you have a regular period and suddenly now you have less eggs in the vault so less are coming out each month and when the brain sends out that FSH signal now there's fewer eggs so it's not getting as dilute and you have one starting to respond sooner so suddenly you're ovulating shorter faster in your cycle you're ovulating on cycle date 9 instead of 14 your ludal phase is still set but the person who comes to see me and says my period have always been 28 to 30 days but now they're every 24 I just figure it's no big deal I am have red flags going off everywhere because I'm now really concerned that potentially their ovarian reserve has dropped to a point where we are starting to see clinical changes now of course things like thyroid and prolactin and other hormones can also cause such changes but that's why you'll hear most reproductive endocrinologists say your periods a Vital sign and what we really mean is the regularity at which it comes and the predictability of it is telling us if your hormones are all communicating in a normal fashion or if something could potentially be off as we all know quality nutrition influences of course our physical health but also our mental health and our cognitive functioning our memory our ability to learn new things and to focus and we know that one of the most important features of highquality nutrition is making sure that we get enough vitamins and minerals from highquality unprocessed or minimally processed sources as well as enough probiotics and prebiotics and fiber to support basically all the cellular functions in our body including the gut microbiome now I like most everybody try to get optimal nutrition from Whole Foods ideally mostly from minimally processed or nonprocessed Foods however one of the challenges that I and so many other people face is getting enough servings of highquality fruits and vegetables per day as well as fiber and probiotics that often accompany those fruits and vegetables that's why way back in 2012 long before I had a podcast I started drinking ag1 and so I'm delighted that ag1 is sponsoring the hubman Lab podcast the reason I started taking ag1 and the reason I still drink ag1 once or twice a day is that it provides all of my foundational nutritional needs that is it provides insurance that I get the proper amounts of those vitamins minerals probiotics and fiber to ensure optimal mental health physical health and performance if you'd like to try ag1 you can go to drink a1.com huberman to claim a special offer they're giving away five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 again that's drink a1.com huberman to claim that special offer let me see if I have this correct um we've got this thing that we call the menstrual cycle the ovulatory cycle the there's two phases a follicular phase and audial phase folicular precedes the ludal phase the ludal phase tends to be if I heard correctly um fairly fixed about 14 days um the follicular phase can vary in duration maybe 10 to 14 days maybe even 10 to 18 days depending on the something about their brain to ovary communication for those that um aren't familiar with this um the I always learned that estrogen primes progesterone is kind of the really basic top Contour description of the ovulatory cycle that you know estrogen is going to slowly climb toward the the point of ovulation and then there's there's rep and then a drop and then progesterone is going to dominate in the ludal phase the second half you said that estrogen um is associated with with a psychological level and a physiological level more energy um feelings of Vitality and some of that estrogen increase is actually coming from the one egg that got stimulated the most the the one that got selected right so picked for the team um potentially for the team but got picked uh potentially for fertilization and that egg sheds its Corpus ludum uh which is this piece of the of the egg that then triggers the progesterone that dominates the ludal phase do I have that right mostly mostly yeah please correct the follicle in which the egg grows right when you ovulate it ruptures the cyst bursts a follicles a cyst a cyst is a fluid fill structure follicles a fluid fill structure that holds an egg so when you ovulate and you get that LH surge the cyst bursts it opens up and the egg comes out of it and then it reheal and becomes the Corpus ludum got it so just a little bit different in timing and you're right with estrogen primes progesterone but really we think about it the layer of the uterus because estrogen stimulates the growth of that lining and then progesterone stabilizes it and allows implantation to occur but the sequence of events of when you're estrogen dominant and progesterone deficient which is the follicular phase and people will come in having Labs drawn randomly and they're all concerned that they don't have progesterone and when you talk to them about where they are in their cycle you say you're not supposed to have progesterone that's your follicular phase this is perfectly normal okay great thanks for that clarification I get a lot of questions about birth control but on my social media handles don't we all don't we are to be clear um this it's a vast topic for exploration but along the lines of what we're talking about now I've heard and I suspect it may not be true but tell me is there any evidence that taking birth control can disrupt the process that you just described and when we talk about birth control we should probably Define what we're talking about so there are um hormone based birth controls aka the pill there are also hormone based birth controls that are not in pill form um there are iuds that are copper iuds there are other iuds let's just talk about hormone-based contraception in females okay uh if which many of them as I understand understand are estrogen mimics or estrogen themselves that suppress ovulation do they diminish or increase the number of eggs that are taken from the Vault fantastic question let's talk about what people say is the pill so let's specifically talk about combined oral contraception the pill which has ethanol estrad and some type of progestin no contraception does not change the release of eggs out of the Vault they are occurring at the same process and the same pathway you're not ovulating because that estrogen does prevent FSH from coming from the brain so you have the group of eggs still come out of the Vault there's no FSH they just all die the next group comes out so when you are saying are you going to run out of eggs faster is it going to harm your fertility does birth control impair the process the answer is no but there's a couple important caveats one is that the birth control pills especially if you take them continuously or for a prolonged period of time the the body is smart and the ovaries start to say we're not really doing anything and one of those markers of ovarian reserve we have is amh and that's antimullerian hormone and amh is made from the granulosis cells or the cells that surround every follicle so in the shortest weight possible more eggs in the vault more come out every month higher amh fewer eggs in the vault fewer come out lower amh if your amh is being suppressed because of the birth control pill because it's decreasing the activity of those granulosis cells you might get a low amh value when you've been on the birth control pill for a long time that is completely reversible but it can be significant so if somebody is wanting to get an amh level let's say somebody comes to my clinic they're not trying to get pregnant and they're on the pill and they're considering freezing their eggs so we're going to check their ovarian reserve if we draw it I always say this amh may be up to 30% lower in somebody who is on the birth control pill so we can still draw it and if it comes back in the normal range we feel good but if it does come back low we're going to have to make a decision are we going to stop the birth control pill for a period of some months use alternative contraception if you don't want to be pregnant and then repeat this test to see if this is a true low because we do see that young women do have low ovarian reserve sometimes or was this just suppressed because you were on the birth control pill so we see it impact some of the hormone testing that we can do and I think that's an important distinction and we can see that the longer you take it that potentially it might actually improve your fertility if you had underlying endometriosis or some medical conditions that we see associated with infertility so prolonged pill users can potentially improve their fertility versus people who are trying to get pregnant that same age who were not on the pill those studies are complicated right because of selection bias because if you've been on the pill for 10 years you're a little bit older so is it that they were preventing pregnancy and the other group potentially had some exposure so they were inherently more infertile than the group that was on the pill but we do know that the pill doesn't cause infertility and I use it all the time all the time in IVF Cycles we put people on the birth control pill because we can actually synchronize that group of eggs that comes out of the Vault to grow together because your body doesn't want to have 20 babies at one time right and what we're trying to do with IVF get 20 eggs to grow if that's what's out of the Vault really goes against the check and balance of the human body to not have 20 babies at once why is it that males who take testosterone synthetic testosterone it shuts down their own testosterone production and sperm production but females who take estrogen in the form of birth control pills it doesn't shut down estrogen production by the ovaries so I love this question you know the answer so I like it extra because I know you're asking spermatogenesis is a constant and ongoing process right so in women you're born with all the eggs you're ever going to have and what we're talking about is if we stop FSH at that moment we're just impacting the ability to ovulate at that time but we're not changing this constant loss throughout the Vault spermatogenesis right the sperm is made every single day you're making brand new sperm so 72 days for the sperm to be created in the testes and 18 days to find their way out the ejaculatory system and so exposures that you have that stop the production of FSH and LH inhibit the development the creation of new sperm so somebody who's been on testosterone will tell the brain the brain doesn't know it's from your taking it it says hey we have plenty of sperm we're good we don't need anymore so the brain then gets suppressed and doesn't make that FSH and LH therefore not stimulating both further testosterone production because you don't need that but testosterone production and sperm production go hand inand so therefore you're no longer making new sperm and in fact the longer you're on testosterone the harder it may be to get sperm production to come back and in 25% of people they may not get it back if they've been on prolonged testosterone exposure so it's really because of what women will sometimes say is unfair which is the fact that you're born with all these eggs and you run out of them they accumulate the wear and care of your life right we see egg quality being a huge issue in female reproduction yet men get to have new sperm every 90 days they get to wash away whatever bad Deeds they did and can change their lifestyle and their exposures and have very different sperm but because of that same process things that shut off the production of FSH LH really impact sperm quite significantly you mentioned bad Deeds um for sperm um not by sperm I said for sperm um and you know we we know that heat is is a uh you know a pretty dramatic insult to the um to the spermatogenesis cycle um saunas and hot tubs and whatnot and I did receive the question as to whether or not um heat exposure saunas hot tubs Etc are they um detrimental to ovulation or egg production in any way I mean obviously things are more internal in females the ovat are internal but is there any evidence for that I mean the body does heat up yeah there's no it doesn't harm the ovul period or the ovaries and just like we know the reason why the testes are so susceptible is because they're supposed to be at a cooler temperature that's why they're in the scrotum outside the body that's why the testes are so susceptible to heat changes but the ovaries being inside the body they're not in the same way now when somebody's pregnant important distinction right we know that the development especially organ development of an embryo can be more sensitive to certain things and that heat exposure at that time whether it's hot tub abuse or extreme fevers even can make a difference in development of a fetus but when it's coming to the ovulatory cycle or hormone production heat in the female doesn't make any difference I want to be clear before I ask the next question that I don't want to be responsible for any unwanted pregnancies but when I was in high school they told us that women can get pregnant even while they have their period is that true seems like a lie based on everything you're saying but I don't want anyone to run out and um test that hypothesis without having the facts first so in general if somebody has extremely regular Cycles then that's a complete lie you can't get pregnant on your period the reason why they tell us this is one especially when you're younger your period Cycles tend to be irregular they're not your body hasn't fully matured to have that regularity and that we know that sperm do live in the reproductive tract for much longer than the egg does so sperm can live there for up to 5 days so if somebody did have a shorter period window let's say their normal periods are going to be 24 days they're ovulating on cycle day 10 if they have a regular period that's five or six days they could potentially have intercourse that end part of that period the sperm could live for 5 days and be right there when you have the egg and Route so it's not the most fertile time for sure and in most people that is considered a time when you're not going to get pregnant but especially when you're younger and you have more irregularity or in people who have a short cycle window that might not be the case so by extension um can we conclude then that the most fertile time is going to be when sperm meets egg let's save timing of intercourse for yep for the time being but because there's can be a delay there uh when sperm meets egg um on obviously day of ovulation or day uh day after day of day of the egg lives for 24 hours so the egg can only be fertilized for 24 hours while it's in the fallopian tube once the egg has entered the uterus it can't be fertilized anymore so it has this very short window of time where it will allow sperm to enter it now sperm can live for 5 days so we'll say the fertile window is this 5-day period ending on the day of ovulation you will hear a lot of us a lot of doctors say the day after ovulation because do you really know exactly what time you ovulate it on and if the egg has 24 hours then that extra day could potentially be helpful but really it's 5 days ending on the day of ovulation and people with very regular Cycles or who can track them and they know when that ovulation is happening the day before and the day of ovulation those are the two top hitting days so if you're kind of not in the mood to have lots of sex those are going to be the days you target to have the highest chance of conceiving and what is the Rel reltionship between estrogen libido and ovulation in females the higher your estrogen is the increased libido that you're going to have and of course you see those Peak estrogen levels which are going to trigger that LH surge so the body is made to get pregnant you're going to have that Peak estrogen that Peak libido right before and right at that ovulatory time period so that hopefully you also want to have intercourse and get pregnant I've heard before let's just say that some people have to be careful here um uh can sense the literally the deployment of the of the egg the the ovulation they they report that they can feel yeah that this let's just say the the departure of the of the uh egg um is that an imaginary thing I mean I always liked I always like that image that people can know when that happens after all men generally know when when their um when their sperm are leaving their body let's hope they do um but um why wouldn't that there be an internal sense for for women also of what's going on I mean we have interoception there's a ton of nerve inovation of that area doesn't communicate to the brain excellent as far as tracking to where that sensation is but you're right I already said ovulation is the rupture of a cyst right it is rupturing and the egg is being released and those follicular fluid is also exiting and going into the paranal cavity and so there is a group of women who can feel that especially people who are very in tune with their body and it has a name it's called middle Schartz the pain almost feels like a crampy pain that happens in the middle of the cycle and that is your ovulatory pain oh interesting what is it called middle Schurz okay we'll put that in the show note captions and whoever does it is going to have to get the spelling right middle Schurz amazing amazing um amazing and foreign to me but for obvious reasons uh but amazing uh I'm always astonished in the um how incredibly well orchestrated this whole process is it's it's just a such an incredible feat of biology just I mean the number of things that have to be timed correctly and the use and I don't want to say reuse but the the repurposing of tissues for different things and like it's what a what an incredible dance it's just amazing it's beautiful I mean I'm so nerdy because I just love how everything has to communicate just perfectly it makes you in awe of all the pregnancies that just happen just all the time because really things have to synchronize really at the wonderful time period And even though this isn't what we're talking about I've heard you say this so I want to say this people always ask every single day well how much sex should you have when should you have sex is there too much sex and what we know is that you definitely should not decrease your sexual intercourse interval so if you are in a relationship and you are sex everyday people have sex every day you will 100% hit inter course throughout your entire fertile window on the day that you ovulate you're depositing the same sperm there because you're not generating new sperm it's whether the load went half and half and half and half or if it went in you know one big group but if you're constantly putting more sperm out there you have a higher chance and so studies go back and always say daily intercourse associated with the highest chance of fundability especially during the fertile window however for couples who are not sex everyday people that idea can cause a lot of stress stress of course impacts the system and a lot of different ways it can also cause sexual burnout where they no longer feel like being intimate or having sex on the day they're actually ovulating because they've been doing it this whole time leading up and that's where the time period of saying have sex every other day throughout the fertile window so starting five or six days before you think you're going to ovulate and then try to Target having intercourse on the day before and the day of ovulation and the reason why people said every other day or a few days prior to kind of get some sperm exposure there in case you ovulated early but really to try to prevent some of that increased stress that can happen when you're trying to conceive especially if you have programmed or timed intercourse that needs to happen on an everyday interval but the odds of getting pregnant by saving up sperm for two or three days that's not higher curious then why if let's just say hypothetically someone is um donating or freezing sperm or doing IVF why they instruct the male to um not ejaculate for 48 to 72 hours prior to um let's just say depositing sperm it's such a funny word um but it works so two points one if we're doing a seen analysis now we're trying to evaluate the sperm and any test has certain normal parameters and these are all based on a 48 to 72h hour abstinence period so yes if you ejaculate more frequently you're going to have less sperm and that can be very normal but if we're looking at a test with set normal parameters that are based on two to three days of not having intercourse that's why we want you to do it for that if we're doing let's say IUI or uterine insemination also known as artificial insemination or where we take the sperm and put it in a catheter and put it in the uterus we're trying get more players further down the field and in that case I know when you ovulate because I'm timing it perfectly and I am trying to get as many possible in this process because we're not just having them deposited in the vagina we're trying to get them further so we want more because that's part of that treatment process and similarly with IVF I want to have as many sperm as possible to sort through and pick out the best looking the most modal the most normally shaped ones so we're trying to get just a better sample and by having these normal guid lines were able to judge this is low for what it should be which can also be a clue to other problems I definitely want to talk about chemistry both um sort of interpersonal chemistry and literally uh ejaculate and vaginal chemistry but before we do that um I'm curious whether or not we can just touch on a few of the things that a lot of people wonder about in terms of egg quality and if they touch on sperm quality maybe we can also just mention that um but for instance um does cannabis either by edible or by smoking cannabis impact Ed quality in either direction uh alcohol would be the next and then I'm going to assume and I have to do this strictly because of what I understand about you know drugs of abuse like cocaine and amphetamine methamphetamine that none of those can be good for systems of the body because they provide they create so much stress for the body um but let's just say alcohol and cannabis um I read a statistic when researching the episode on cannabis that shocked me which is that 15% 15% not 1.5 15% of American women at least in this one study survey reported having consumed or smoked cannabis during known pregnancy which is wild wild unless of course I'm just naive and THC is not harmful to fetus but I have a hard time believing that so what gives I mean here we're and and there I actually just threw in fetal development so is cannabis is Al alcohol bad for egg quality so they're different things and they're the same thing in one so let's answer them each individually so we'll go with the one that everybody knows and has accepted now that they wouldn't have accepted 40 years ago right smoking cigarettes so that's obviously bad decreases the number of eggs you have in the vault smoking cigarettes actually gets into your Vault decreases the number that you have you have a higher chance of going into menopause earlier and it increases the risk of having abnormal chromosomes which is what we really think about we think about egg quality right impacting those myotic spindles inside the eggs which hold the chromosomes in their perfect position they are associated they get wear and tear from things that cause inflammation or are toxic so cigarette smoke we know decreases egg quality egg quantity increases miscarriage and then of course has fetal impacts could I just when we talk about um there's nicotine which itself is not carcinogenic and then there's the smoking process which brings in a bunch of other things the the question I know is burning in everybody's mind is vaping yeah right because vaping is I'm I'm very bullish on this I mean it's very clear that the chemicals associated with vaping are just oh so bad for Everybody's Health but it's distinctly different from saying that nicotine is bad for one's health and it can be but um without doing too much of a deep dive is are there any data that show that vaping is bad for egg quality of course there's not as much data because it just hasn't been around as long but yes vaping definitely has chemicals that looks like it's associated with poor success rates in IVF cycles and that's really kind of one of the most finite measures of egg quality we can see because we're really testing the egg at a level in a lab versus just are you getting pregnant naturally and sorry to interject again but anytime a conversation like this comes up especially between two people in the health science space um there are these shouts because I hear them literally where people say well listen I Vaped every day and I've had three healthy babies and I think that my response is always okay there's going to be a distribution of responses and then of course how much healthier could your babies have been had you not Vaped during pregnancy or Vaped prior to pregnancy or I mean I think these are the the key issues that like you can't you can't rewind the clock as far as I know right in the absence of a time machine you can't rewind the clock so um I mean basically everything you're saying is that smoking cigarettes or vaping nicotine just can't be good for egg we know that we know that it's not good for getting pregnant we know that it's not good for sperm and therefore we also know it's going to impact pregnancy rates you know things like cannabis right decreases sperm production decreases sperm motility changes sperm morphology the shape of it changes the DNA increases the fragmentation of the DNA if your partner uses cannabis and you get pregnant you have a higher chance of miscarriage because of the sperm association with the Cannabis now edible cannabis as well as right because you can't study something that's illegal so a lot of this data is just more new and a lot of it's going to be observational and in States like Colorado and California where you know canvas is essentially legal um yeah I'm assuming there more data but okay so um smoking Andor Vape keeping nicotine cannabis either edible or smoked very likely detrimental to egg quality and sperm quality which is not to say that one can't conceive it just means that the quality of your baby the your child will not be as high as the quality of that baby if you didn't do that is that right yes and I'm not I'm not trying to demonize anyone that did did do this during pregnancy a lot of people didn't know but this is this is really about people trying to make choices and an ation of future pregnancy yeah and when you're trying to set yourself up for Success because we know infertility is becoming more common we don't always know who is going to have it and when you find yourself in that position specifically you now want to optimize everything you can so if there's something that is going to make the sperm quality worse and the Egg quality worse and your success with treatment lower and your miscarriage rate higher we're going to recommend that you not do it if you're trying to get pregnant naturally all these things correlate over but of course there's always going to be outliers and exceptions I'm going to sit here and tell you that the odds of getting pregnant at age 43 are less than 3% per month and every single person is going to be like but my Aunt Barbara or I know this person who did because 3 person's not zero and you're talking about natural pregnany there by by uh inter old fashioned way yes okay right but yes so people will get pregnant people will have healthy children who do have exposures to nicotine to cannabis even to alcohol even though we know that alcohol can cause fetal alcohol syndrome 0% of alcohol should be the acceptable level in pregnancy and then does alcohol impact fertility such a complicated question and this is probably due to the amount you consume and the frequency of which you consume it alcohol is a toxin that your liver must filter out and We Know It causes inflammation anybody who's had a fun night with alcohol knows they can wake up the next day and they feel different their body is processing that alcohol and that inflammation especially if it's chronic chronic exposure we know chronic inflammation is one of the things that we see impacting egg quality and sperm quality so certainly if you enjoy alcohol it should be something that is done in moderation one or two drinks a week at the most and you should not do it at all once you find out you're pregnant I'd like to take a quick break and thank our sponsor insid tracker inside tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term Health can only be assessed with a quality blood test the problem with a lot of blood and DNA tests out there however is that they'll give you information about certain lipid markers or hormone markers but no information about what to do with all of that data inside tracker makes it very easy to look at your levels of hormones metabolic factors lipids Etc and then to assess what sorts of Behavioral nutritional supplementation or perhaps other interventions you might want to use in order to bring those numbers into the ranges that are optimal for your health inside tracker's ultimate plan now includes three new hormone markers that are critical to measure during a woman's reproductive and menopausal years these are estrad progesterone and thyroid stimulating hormone if you'd like to try insid tracker you can go to insid tracker.com huberman to get 20% off any of insid tracker's plans again that's sidet tracker.com huberman to get 20% off when we were talking about birth control I unfortunately moved us forward and and forgot to ask about iuds oh yeah so my understanding is that the copper IUD works by creating a sort of um not actually electric but a kind of a electric um fence that kills sperm like sperm don't like copper sperm don't like copper copper likes to kill sperm um there's some interesting uh history I've been reading a lot on the history of Medicine of um people who you know for whatever reason were forced into or chose to be in the the sex trade prostitutes using um inserting copper coins into their vaginal tract to try and uh kill sperm but to varying degrees of success obviously there's a whole um socioeconomic landscape around that so um I think it's obvious what I'm referring to but um very interesting but that's just one form of IUD right there there are some other iuds and then there's of course the ring we didn't talk about that so maybe we just touch on a few of those in within the context of whether or not it Alters egg quality Andor future fertility when one takes the ring out takes the IUD out this is a great question because a lot of people don't know this and and I'll roll through a few of the top birth control methods and just thinking through copper IUD as you already said no hormonal involvement it causes inflammation and a toxic environment inside the uterus isolated does cause sometimes heavier periods but they should still be regular if they are irre that's a sign of a hormonal issue because you still ovulate with the copper IUD is it literally a copper wire woven into the the well the IUD is a is a little te and the arms are have copper wires wrapped around them and they and those are they grow into the uterine lining they don't grow into the uterine lining the IUD just sits in there and just the presence of that copper causes that inflammatory reaction in that toxic environment and is it toxic to the environment in ways that are detrimental to the woman or just to sperm both I mean implantation is not going to occur likely right I mean no nothing has 100% successful but it's much harder for an embryo to implant within that highly inflammatory environment to me amazing that people figured this out before the like Laboratories right let's just put some copper in some uteruses and see what happens right you know it I it really speaks to the the urgency that must have existed to preventing pregnancy and they just how costly biologically and pregnanc financially pregnancy is and pregnancy is not Health neutral so it is something that somebody needs to be in of right health or it can be a deadly circumstance when we get back to other iuds so iuds that more people are more familiar with are the progesterone based iuds this is going to be your Morena Kina liletta they have a bunch of different names based on the amount of progesterone and how long they last for these work mostly by thinning out the uterine lining as we already said progesterone compacts the uterine lining to prepare it for implantation in a normal cycle but if you have constant exposure to Progesterone what is going to happen is it's going to prevent the uterine lining from growing and it gets it very very thin not all iuds in fact most of them don't prevent ovulation only in about 50% of people do they actually prevent ovulation so their main mechanism of action is this endometrial effect when you remove the IUD especially if you already ovulating no problem the problem we do see in some people with progesterone iuds that maybe isn't talked about as much is that this prolonged progesterone exposure because people are putting iuds in for 5 to seven years and not having a period for that length of time because the endometrium has become so atrophic or non-existent that you're no longer bleeding despite the fact that you may be ovulating it can take a while for that lining to grow back and so it's not uncommon to have an IUD in place and if you have no period you're going to say this is great I don't have a period wonderful you get it removed and now your period hasn't come back and that leads people to sometimes be concerned that the IUD is causing them not to ovulate or they have this infertility caused by the IUD but really what it is is that the Linings become so so thin that it can take many months of that unopposed estrogen exposure in the follicular phase to get it thick enough to finally bleed when you're ovulating so I do tell people if they have a progesterone IUD to get it removed 3 to 6 months before they want to get pregnant use some other form of contraception but give their body time to make sure they have that regular period pattern back important distinction if you're still ovulating and having a period on an IUD then this is going to be less of a concern because if you're growing enough of a lining to then shed it we're less worried about it but if you are aaric or have absence of your periods with an IUD we need to think about removing it for a period of time before you get pregnant so that your body can grow that lining again when it comes to some of the other things that you mentioned one I you didn't ask that I want to mention is the Depo pra shot the Depo pra shot is a high dose of progesterone high enough to actually prevent ovulation so in that circumstance you are not ovulating and therefore if you don't ovulate you're not going to get pregnant Depo PR is proven to prevent ovulation for 3 months so when you take it you need to get it every 3 months to have a proven contraceptive benefit however it can last in your system for 18 months and prevent ovulation for up to 18 months so I will see people who liked that option for contraception and now they haven't had a period in a long time but their last Deo shot was 6 months ago and they're all frustrated by the fact when I tell them well you still may not have another period for a year plus because this high level of progesterone that you've already injected into your system can last a substantial amount of time so that is a contraceptive option that I tell people to discontinue a year and a half to two years before they want to get pregnant which sometimes people don't know that yet and so that's something that can be a contraceptive option for if you're very remote from wanting to have a child but in people who are in their childbearing years contemplating family building soon that is not my favorite option so you haven't mentioned because I haven't asked um any negative consequences of birth control of any kind and I'm not encouraging you to if you don't believe in them I know that this is a very controversial um topic but um you know one of the more popular studies discussed on social media is one that I I've spent some time with the paper um and a few of the papers that stemmed from it um not a huge study but describing that how women rate the faces of men as either more essentially what happens is there there seems to be at least in this study a there was a a statistically significant um bias uh for women to select particular male faces as attractive and those male faces tended to be of the more you know square jaw AKA masculine features right in a quotes right this is what the study um found um but that when women were on oral contraception presumably estrogen progestin type oral contraception that that effect um was smeared they had a not a statistically significant tendency to uh choose the quote unquote more masculine faces I have to be very careful with my language here because you know it's easy to get description of a study like this wrong and that has led a lot of people to think that birth control is going to throw off their partner Choice um now of course it's a small study um studies like it are not always so well controlled um but is there any evidence that birth control oral oral estrogen progestin based birth control just to keep it specific can increase rates of cancers can decrease rates of cancers can lead to um any sorts of disruptions in um bodily uh function or health that's really like a rock solid result that's been seen by multiple studies clinical trials um or are we still just in the dark about a lot of this stuff okay so nothing is without risk getting pregnant is not without risk taking the birth control pill is not without risk we do see that there's been a lot of not informed consent and people who are taking the birth control pill meaning maybe they weren't educated about what all of their options were the positives and the negatives about each one of them if we're going to reference the combo to the pill estrogen progesterone pill important to understand that neither the estrogen nor the progesterone are the same estrogen progesterone that your ovaries make right it's ethanol estradi which your brain interprets as an estrogen but other parts of your body may not and then it's various types of progestins some of which have even androgenic or male hormonik properties and some of which do not so there's a ton of variation even the amount of ethanol estradi that each pill has with your low low and your low pills having less and even with the modern-day average pill having a lot less estrogen than it used to when you're on the birth control pill your ovaries aren't making estradiol and that estradiol is important in growing the uterine lining but also for the genital structures and so we think about vaginal health and bulvar health we certainly see that especially with continuous use so if we distinguish you take the pill for 21 days and you have a 7-Day break where you might bleed or you take sugar pills and then you take them again a lot of people now are taking continuously where you have exposure to these compounds every single day H so in in like the the um the wheel the little little pouch with a wheel of different colored pills um may have seen these on the on the countertop in previous relationships um and then there's the ones that sometimes people just opt not to take because those are the not the placebo sugar pills so like that there's no need to take Esten during that phase and then and then they repeat is that exactly okay but some people are taking estrogen continu very common right now so people and they're not wrong they say oh well why have a period in these little breaks it's not really a reflection of my hormone status which is accurate and so they're taking them continuously you also have less pill failure pregnancies so if you're using the pill for contraception that can be a great strategy but the longer you take them we do see some vaginal and vulvar changes right and so Ric vaginitis people who notice increased sensitivity decreased elasticity increased discomfort with intercourse increase in like yeast infections that can sometimes be see because that environment is different now that's just one thing that can come from the pill we also see the pill be life saving for other people they have terrible you know PMS or premenstrual dysphoric syndrome where their mental health when they change from high to low estrogen it's always the change in estrogen that interferes can cause some people to really have mental health issues that are so severe that having that stable hormone level is helpful and so the pill can be extremely beneficial for some people when it comes to mental health it can be beneficial for people who have issues with very heavy periods and anemia instead of getting blood transfusions you know taking the birth control pill might prevent the lining of the uterus from growing so much that they bleed so much same thing with fibroids people with PCOS PCOS is polycystic ovarian syndrome if we want to put it very simply you have a lot of eggs in your Vault so you release a lot of eggs every month and what this does is the FSH signal gets diluted and so you're not responding to the normal signal and you don't ovulate and because the ovary is a hormone making factory it gets really bored when it can't make estrogen because that egg's not growing so it starts to make testosterone so you start to see this Androgen dominant environment associated with lack of ovulation and having a lot of follicles inside the ovary that are not really responding and the androgens excuse me androgenization of other tissues like like body hair deepening of voice body hair typically the level of testosterone made in PCOS isn't truly deepening voice it can if there is an ovarian tumor making testosterone or certain other conditions but typically with PCOS you see increase in body hair increase in acne and you can see some even like male pattern balding some temporal balding of women so some hair loss temporal Bal so like the W the Widow peing yeah the Widow peeking and then thinning out in these two areas and then we see an increase in body composition towards a male level so if we think about a male body holding your fat in your abdominal region and if we think about the traditional female body holding more fat in the hips and thighs area we see that when this hormone shifts in PCOS you tend to get more abdominal fat distribution which then leads to further insulin resistance and metabolic syndrome but in PCOS because you're not ovulating and those ovaries each little follicle makes a tiny amount of estrogen we'll say each little follicle when it's not responding will make you know one to two peagrams of estrogen but if you have 50 of them each month you're having some constant estrogen exposure so that lining of the uterus is being constantly stimulated to grow and you're never getting the progesterone to stabilize or the progesterone withdraw to bleed so endometrial cancer is much higher in people with PCOS who don't ovulate and the birth control pill can prevent that any unopposed estrogen situation because the body is made to have both estrogen and progesterone so we see an immense decrease in endometrial cancer an immense drop in ovarian cancer ovarian cancer comes from the remodeling of the ovary so every time you have a follicle grow and it ruptures and it makes the Corpus ludum and then it heals up those are opportunities for those cancer cells to go away in that remodeling process and lead to ovarian cancer and because you're not ovulating on the pill your incidence of ovarian cancer drops dramatically 10 years of pel use has dropped the chance you get ovarian cancer by more than 90% And of course ovarian cancer is super hard to diagnose because the inovation to the perianal system is poor and you don't have any out signs often to late stage disease that being said could you potentially have an increase in breast cancer in some people by taking the Pill by taking the pill that that's a concern especially in people who might be predisposed to this for some other reason they might have braa mutations or something like that um and then is there a situation where the pill certainly masks what's going on with your menstrual cycle and I really think this is where Women's Health had has a huge hist and paternalism meaning doctors would just tell people this is what you're going to do so your periods are irregular here is the birth control pill and they're not explaining why or the pros and cons to it and what happens is people are not being taught how their bodies work and now they are because of your podcast amongst others and now they're able to know that my period is a Vital sign and I don't know what it is because the pill is producing a different environment the pill's also been associated with potentially development of things like leaky gut or IBS and so there is a definite change in your environment when you're on the birth control pill increase risk of blood clots because of how it's processed in the liver increasing your clotting factors can I just U up there you know I'm aware um that a a fair Fairly high percentage of people have um mutations in Factor 5 lien a clotting Factor um fewer people are as we say homo I guess have two deficient copies or mutant copies I should say um but there are many people out there that have one mutant copy of factor 5 lien and my understanding is that oral contraception in females um can really exacerbate the factor 5 lien mutation do you suggest that people get um get their Factor 5 lien um genetics analyzed I mean it's pretty inexpensive to do right I think on a standard blood test you can just ask for the factor 5 um analysis and it's not like a a really in-depth thing you don't have to fly to BL yeah you don't have to fly you don't have to fly to another country you know like you do for many things um it's important to say that's not the norm right like that's not the recommendation when you're talking about putting somebody on the birth control pill you want to make sure they don't have high blood pressure because it can increase their blood pressure you want to make sure they don't smoke cigarettes because the combination of the pill and cigarette smoking can increase the risk of a stroke but the recommendation is not to screen them to see if they have any inherited clotting disorders that said if you ever have a blood clot on the birth control pill because you're traveling on a plane or you're just on the pill or you're living your life you're now going to get this extensive work up to find out if you do have that it's by no means wrong and specifically you should if anybody in your family has ever had a DVT so a deep vein thrombosis so a blood CAU in their leg or a pulmonary embolism or a PE so anybody in your family has had one of those you should 100% get worked up for clotting disorders and if you have something like you carry Factor 5 you should no longer take the birth control pill and specifically the pill because it's an oral pill and how it's metabolized in the liver is actually what is causing the change in those clotting factors because that's where they're made as well so it doesn't mean you can't take any form of contraception but we do want to make sure that we counsel you appropriately I never think it's wrong to be an advocate for your own health or to ask questions it's important to know that screening I mean I'll get on my Soap Box because we'll talk about screening for ovarian reserve and it is 100% not recommended even though I think it should be yeah my next question was going to be about testing amh levels and um and we'll return to that for those that hear that and it sounds cryptic as well as getting an ultrasound just seeing basically how many how many eggs are are in likely to be in in the Vault on on both sides okay so we have to remember that screening recommendations come from at what point in the population does it make sense to spend the money to test for a disease based on the likelihood of finding it so if we think about right that's what your papsmear guidelines and your colonoscopy and your mammograms everything is all based on when are you going to find enough cases at some age to make it worthwhile testing which is a crazy principle especially in the US because the government's not paying for our health care so why should these guidelines be based on when is it cost effective to do testing well I I'll put in a this is going to sound a little bit conspiratorial but it's not I mean I think that given that for people who have insurance private paid insurance or through their work um that there's a cost to doing these tests of any kind colonoscopy amh Etc and uh they must have figured out the you know optimal point on the graph with which they can reduce their payout to people who for instance get colon cancer if they didn't get the colonoscopy at 45 as opposed to 50 as opposed to 60 as opposed to 25 I mean this is I mean the reality we know is that the more information you have the better choices you can make I mean the only caveat to that would be that uh for some not all but for some people sort of of the hypochondria type sometimes more information leads to more anxiety which leads to more problems but that's a rare instance that is I always think that in general data is always good agre having the information at hand about your body and being able to make educated choices versus being in a position where you say I had no idea that I had Factor five Li in and I had this terrible blood clot because pulmonary emms can kill people we all know that right so we talk about this rare thing but it can happen but this is really where it can be tough it can be tough to find even a doctor who may like we said Factor five is a blood test and relatively inexpensive so that one is not hard but Physicians live in a weird world where you know they have recommendations based on screening based on the likelihood of finding disease that they follow and when they go off of those they start introducing themselves to why are you not following medical guidelines but for an individual this is really tough to advocate for yourself and the one thing that I'll say too this is why paying attention to your body is so important right understanding your stool habits and what's normal and what's not so that you can catch early signs of things and present for that colonoscopy earlier the current screening guideline for should you get your ovarian reserve checked is that you should not ACOG the American College of OBGYN has an entire practice bulletin situation saying there's no utility and screening for amh okay I mean I totally disagree but I'm glad you disagree I mean to me it just seems nuts I mean um or ovaries rather I mean the um the amh is a blood draw amh is a blood test it's a blood draw it one could opt to do the um ultrasound as well which is of course more invasive but but women who are seeing their OBGYN are probably familiar with with with um pelvic exams yeah I mean it's a faginal ultrasound but it's not painful not painful um but different than a blood draw just just for in full disclosure so um and you know I've heard of women in their early 30s going in getting their amh levels checked getting their ultrasound and then going oh my goodness they're down to like you know I I don't want to throw out numbers because this actually can get tricky um you know they'll say oh you have whatever you know four follicles and then someone in their early 40s will have 20 follicles and then people start to it sort of becomes a scorekeeping thing and and of course follicle quality there a bunch of other things um and then you can tell us more about those but let's say someone did not have insurance or or Insurance permission to um to get this paid for what is the approximate cost of getting one's amh levels analyzed $79 $79 to find out essentially where your ovarian reserve is at so let's talk about this I already said this in my soap box so ACOG says you shouldn't screen it because amh does not predict your fundability right your body's ability to get pregnant in that month is independent of your amh and for the most part that's true right because let's say you have a person and they're both 30 you have two people one has low ovarian reserve they have five eggs coming out of the Vault and this one has normal ovarian reserve and they have 20 eggs coming out of the Vault and we should probably clarify that the number of because you said this earlier but the number of eggs coming out of the vault is an indirect measure of how many eggs is in the vault when that number is going down it means the number of eggs in the vault is likely going down as well s of like your body starts to take smaller withdrawals as you start to run out of the Vault wants to be at like equilibrium right it really wants to be in this Middle Ground so when you have too many it shoots out more every month it's too crowded it doesn't want that and then when it starts to get low it gets scared about being empty and sends out fewer per month so what you see outside the Vault and that is called an anro follicle count or an AFC it's an ultrasound based measurement of how many eggs you have outside the vault at one point in time and on the ultrasound if one looks um this is going to show up as so what it look like um little Hollow spaces like so not gray stuff but but Hollow Bodies I say chocolate chips and the chocolate chip cookie if we can imagine the overy yeah like looks like a chocolate chip cookie the chocolate chips small little dark fluid fil follow each one of those houses an egg some bigger than others because they're more mature than others based on when you check in the cycle so if you're looking in that early follicular phase when somebody's on their period they're they all should be small because nothing's been stimulated if I'm looking per ulatory I'll see that dominant follicle that's about to ovulate and then everything else will be small and is there a a graph that people can look at or that we could link to that says okay the the average with a distribution of you know standard error on either side for let's say a 28 year old woman or a 37y old woman or a 45y old woman of the number of follicles on the right and left side and as I understand asymmetries are common yeah um tends to be you know like if someone goes in and they you got six follicles on the left side and 12 on the other side are they how do how do people gauge what what fantas points one because their doctor should tell them but that doesn't always happen but yes we we add these counts together to get your anro folicle count because there is often a symmetry but what we should expect let's say in somebody who's 30 is you should have in the 16 to 20 range of total follicles per month right and left side combined okay when you're 35 that number is closer to like 14 to 16 so starting to drop it's still pretty good when you're 40 it's 8 to 10 when you're 44 2 to 4 right so you start to have this immense drop that exponentially starts to increase really around age 37 so things start to kind of get into this severe Zone really after age 37 and we didn't really talk about ages 18 to 25 but there are people who get pregnant in that age bracket are is the follicle count very very high is there sort of an a is a nonlinear drop off or yeah their follicle count would be higher and I mean I occasionally have patients who are very young but have infertility or want to freeze their eggs I've also had patients in that age range who are in premature ovarian failure right because there can be things that go wrong even early but we should probably highlight again something that you said earlier but gosh I you know this like contradicts so much of what's out there which is that even if you have low follicle count if you collect eggs you're not changing what's in the vault you're not pulling From the Vault you're not you can't right that those eggs are spent you you you now have the opportunity to turn them into potential pregnancies correct I mean side note right we haven't even dove into IVF but that's the next wave of technology is what we call IVM in vitro maturation people are trying to figure out how can you get a From the Vault and get them to grow in the lab because that would open up possibilities for people who have fewer eggs to have a higher efficiency of this process because one of the limiting factors when you're doing fertility when you're doing egg freezing or IVF is how many eggs can you get per month and that's why some people have to do cycle after cycle because they can only get five eggs or five eggs but if we Circle back to what we were saying when we got off on this beautiful tangent is that no matter if you have five or you have 20 eggs outside the all you're ovulating one so you're trying to get pregnant naturally that's what fundability is probability of getting pregnant per month naturally you have the same chance if you're the same age regardless of if you have five eggs or you have 20 eggs and that's why AOG came in and said well amh doesn't impact fundability it doesn't predict your ability to get pregnant or who's going to have infertility and who's not going to have infertility so there's no utility and screening for it in people now for one some speechless I mean that that argument makes sense through the lens of just probabilities of pregnancy um through natural conception um but it completely erases the very very very real situation where people are making choices about for instance whether or not to stay with a given partner whether or not to leave a given partner whether or not to accelerate the process of building a family my egg should I have a baby now goodness like there's so many factors that this American College of whoever ever is like completely deal but they're crazy and that's what I say they they argue in their statement that finding that you have sorry I'm like reeling it in I mean think you're trying to think of an analogy that doesn't fail but it's like if you can it's like saying okay if you can walk now great there's no reason to test for this inevitable paralysis that's going to happen at different rates in different people and there are things that you can do to offset in other words you could like take a little bit of some tissue that will allow you to walk in the future but we're not going to do that because if you can walk now you can walk now it's good now that's absurd and that's really what it is and they say well finding out that you have low ovarian reserve at a young age is going to cause undue stress that is unwarranted because most people don't have infertility and so they're purely putting it through the lens of your likelihood to get pregnant but it's actionable stress exactly like if it were just stress like hey guess what and you know I know people who have family members with Huntington mutations and some opt to not not know whether or not they themselves have have the Huntington mutation and and it's a very personal choice right but here that whereas unfortunately there still isn't a a cure for Huntington hopefully someday there will be Mal come would but in the meantime there's essentially a a cure for this situation which is the Harvest and potential fertilization there at least an opportunity and this is what I say and of course you and I feel similarly education and data like being the one to make the choice is an extremely important distinction versus having it happen to you so if you're young and you find out you have low ovarian reserve is that going to make a difference and it very well might you might now freeze your eggs when you wouldn't have otherwise you might now start to try to get pregnant if you're partnered when you otherwise were just waiting but change the conversation with your partner too right because a lot of people think they can just wait because of age right we're in our I can totally wait but if you have a low ovarian reserve then that you may lose the opportunity for Parenthood and for a lot of people this is a life goal and this is what's Wild to me when on earth besides reproduction do we have life goals that we take the approach I'll just wait and see if it's a problem later never right if you want to become a doctor you want to become an athlete you are constantly working towards that goal or understanding what it's going to take to get there but why does the goal of Parenthood the the attitude is completely I'm not going to to think about it until later and then I'll deal with it if it becomes a problem because you can make change choices you could freeze your eggs you could try to get pregnant sooner you could evaluate for reasons of low ovarian reserve do you have a genetic mutation or an autoimmune disease why is it low it's not just always a big unknown there can be some actual things that potentially might be impactful for your health long term so I think it's wild that this is the current conversation and I will say I know personally a lot of OBGYNs who 100% will draw an amh blood task if you're at your annual and you ask and I recommend all of my OB friends because I see people at a different stage right when they see me they're struggling to get pregnant or they want to freeze their eggs but when we talk about this I say hey just like you say are you trying to get pregnant now and if somebody says no and your follow-up question is well do you want to be on birth control the same question should be well do you want to be pregnant at some point and if so should you consider freezing your eggs or getting this blood test checked and very often people will make a different decision with that information I'm so glad that you're highlighting this because my understanding is at least in the state of California I don't know about other states or if it even varies by state that the opportunity to harvest eggs uh and freeze them um there's a hard cut off at age I think it is 42 prior to age 42 they'll do it um after 42 they'll do it if and only if you're willing to do invital fertilization to actually fertilize and then they'll freeze embryos but they're far more reluctant to collect eggs after age 42 yes yes and no so when you think about egg freezing and IVF are really the same process right when you're going through the exact same thing you're taking the eggs out of the body and then you're either just freezing them as an egg or you're fertilizing them in the lab and that's IVF and making an embryo right away egg freezing has changed dynamically over the past 10 years whereas 10 years ago survival rate of eggs in the lab was 40% really terrible and so we really didn't offer it to many people it wasn't something that was talked about and now it feels trendy almost but it's really just the tech has gotten so much better and cheaper yeah 90% of eggs now survive the freea so 90% is not a low number by any means embryos are much stronger right an egg is a single cell it's a single cell an embryo when we freeze an embryo that's day five or six is 300 plus cells so it's so much stronger and those embryos survive the freeze thought 99% of the time so yes there's a 9% difference that being said making embryos is a lot more expensive eggs is cheaper you could do two rounds of eggs and have just as many eggs or have more eggs than if you'd made them into embryos right away so I never recommend that somebody commits to a sperm source that they don't want to have a child with unless that that's the sperm Source they want to have a child and this has changed because when embryo survival was so much greater than egg survival especially if you had few eggs or you were older making embryos was the only option what we do know is that egg quality decreases immensely as we get older and we've touched on this but we haven't really mentioned it so not only do you have fewer eggs as you get older the chromosomes inside start to lose their positioning and so we think about egg quality we think about genetic normaly and we know that the rates of aneuploidy or abnormal chromosomes increases proportionally to your age which um for people that aren't aware are going to predispose not always um to miscarriages if they're implanted or potentially even uh the formation of a of a fetus that carries for instance tricomes so CH chromosomal repeats or um lack of lack of certain chromosomes these could be deadly or they could be um capable of carrying to term and then but have undetectable Demi to severe developmental um abnormalities correct correct and this is this is why it you have a lower probability of pregnancy per month as you get older so if we look at your natural fundability it's not because you have fewer eggs because we already said your egg count per month doesn't impact your probab ility of getting pregnant it's because the normaly of those chromosomes has changed so dramatically that the odds that your body's randomly choosing the good one to ovulate become so low and that's why those natural fertility rates are so low because most genetically abnormal eggs do not fertilize or implant but if they do they have a significantly higher chance of miscarriage it's 40% at age 40 right so you have a much lower chance of seeing the positive pregnancy test but then your chance of losing that pregnancy is significantly higher as well so when we are counseling somebody about egg phrasing what we know is that not every egg is going to fertilize with sperm going to make an embryo going to be genetically normal or even implant when it is genetically normal there is huge loss in human reproduction meaning the more eggs you have at a younger age the better the ROI on this process is going to be it doesn't mean you don't do it when people get older but every Clinic does have a cut off and every Clinic is going to be a little bit different a lot of different reasons why we actually probably have an older cut off so we will let somebody go through IVF or freeze their eggs up to age 45 and it's a lot about informed consent and having the approach that you're smart enough that if I give you the odds and I walk you through how many eggs you are and the likelihood of them making into embryos you can say yeah but four eggs or 10 eggs is way more than zero based on my circumstance and that is worth it to me because it gives me the opportunity to potentially have a child when otherwise my opportunity is going to be zero so a lot of this is rooted in paternalism that people can't as a patient understand these odds and they have unrealistic expectations I think there's a huge shift in Reproductive Medicine to really counseling patients and giving them autonomy and some of these decisions but there does become a point where there's the likelihood of finding a normal egg is so so low that the money or the expense of the process doesn't make sense and people should utilize egg donation or other opportunities for conception this drop in both the number of eggs and the Egg quality they really start to become so profound at age 37 and on and that's when we really start to see both these things are overlapping at the same time so if you're waiting till age 35 36 for your first kid but you want two or three we've got to really look forward about is that is that strategy makes sense well what is your amh one are you going to run out of eggs before then two how what other issues could be going on is the sperm fine are the tubes open because we are seeing that when people start families later when people have more chronic illness and autoimmune disease and obesity that it's much harder to get pregnant and so the birth rates right for the first time in a long time across the board are dropping and infertility is rising because of all of these factors combined So based on everything you just said and and yes I'm going to say it a fifth time because the misconception about this is one of the primary reasons why people avoid harvesting eggs it's not the only reason but when you harvest eggs freeze them now sounds like the viability of those eggs is is quite quite strong compared to a few years ago uh so that's great 9 % uh recovery uh when they thaw them um is not going to diminish the number of eggs in the vault such a critical point um and post age 37 there's a sounds like a nonlinear drop off in egg quality for most and these are averages right so every be the people that got pregnant with healthy kids in their late 30s and 40s you know yes we hear you um congratulations we're happy um but this speaks to the kind of the the logic anyway we're not putting any emotion or circumstances on this but the logic of somebody in their let's say late 20s early 30s getting their amh levels through a roughly $80 blood draw um and then perhaps based on their life goals and circumstances doing either one or several rounds of egg collection and freezing especially since it sounds like you don't need to fertilize those eggs so if one doesn't have a partner is concerned about what they're going to do who's who's going to be uh who's going to provide the sperm you know um because of course some people choose to raise kids on their own um but parenting is a whole other issue but um they could do that later so that raises the questions of what are the health risks if any um pain levels if any and um and that includes psychological pain of egg Harvest I mean so going back to what you said earlier this is going to be inject um synthetic mimics of FSH and LH um follicle stimulating hormone and Luiz hormone maybe some growth hormone I hear nowadays there's also the practice of injecting um uh these are essentially uh platelet FR plasma PRP uh platelet rich plasma excuse me uh PRP in perhaps even into the ovarian Vault we can get back to that so there's a bunch of stuff that's being done to some when there's low stem where people are getting like low doses of these drugs there's High stem where it's like a full blast maybe you could walk us through that procedure in just sort of General Contour because it you know it would require a lot of time to go through it all in detail but is this a horrible thing to go through is it mild to go through is it like a walk in the park um let let's walk through it all so I I love this and this is my bread and better and this is what I do every day studies tell us that if you are not ready to have a family by age 32 to 33 that that is the optimal time for the average person to intervene and freeze their eggs it's not up for debate it's when you have both the intersection of still still a good egg quality and Good Egg quantity on average and so that is younger than a lot of people are thinking about having families and the reason why is when we really think about what happens to the egg afterward that's what's really critically important so I'm going to answer the question about what you go through but just thinking we already said you freeze your eggs 90% of them are going to survive the freey about 75% will be fertilized by sperm and about 50% of those will even make it to an implantation stage embryo or a blast we're assuming healthy sperm so sperm sperm no DNA excessive DNA fragmentation already hit the nail on the head one of the biggest issues with egg freezing is I don't know the future I don't know if this sperm is going to be great or not I don't it could be from a pot smoker just kidding pot smokers not kidding pot smokers we're not but we don't know right so we have this future yet undetermined sperm source so I am going to assume you're going to fall average on these data points that we're going to walk through but the reality is you buffer the risk by having more eggs frozen and that's why people are going through multiple rounds or Cycles because we don't know we don't know how that fertilization will be if you have 20 eggs and 18 survive the freeze thaw and 14 fertilize and seven make it to the blasticus stage if you're age 30 we would anticipate around 60 to 70% of them are going to be genetically normal and you're young that's that's already kind of a big hit at that age so let's say of the seven four of them are genetically normal when I go to transfer them I have at best a 65% chance of live birth per embryo which is really good when you put in the lens of fundability and Peak success tends to be closer to 20% and you're going to implant one embryo at a time 100% we're going to implant one embryo at a time now does anyone ask for two people ask for two doctors will do two it is it lowers live birth rates if we're looking at giving each embryo the healthiest opportunity of becoming a baby number number one embryos with IVF have a slightly higher chance of monozygotic twinning right so twinning fraternal twinning comes if you ovulate two eggs they both get fertilized so each baby is completely different genetically own egg own sperm monozygotic is from an embryo split because of the IVF process likely putting the embryo in the catheter maybe having that you know outer surface touched predisposes it to splitting after you put it into the body so more identical twins two to 3% chance of monozygotic twins with IVF and the natural chance is .3% so significantly higher even though ultimately not a probable outcome I'm going to have a couple patients a year who are going to have monozygotic twins and if I put two embryos in I've now one taken this from a potential twin pregnancy to a triplet or even a quad if they both split so hence presumably like the octomom cases and things like that well that one they just literally put eight embryos inside but that's a whole I mean that's medical malpractice right but really most the time when we're talking about embryos we're talking about people with infertility or people who spent a significant amount of money a huge portion of fertility is embryo quality right the competency of the embryo the genetics of the embryo it's expensive to go through egg freezing and IVF yet the uterine environment is another component it doesn't make sense to waste multiple embryos in the same uter environment statistically doesn't make sense it also doesn't make sense to make your embryos compete against each other so will people put one embryo into let's just say DNA Mom right and one into surrogate mom and and try and get two siblings um simultaneously I've definitely done that and had patients do that it's not common because surrogacy using a gational carrier is so expensive and there's such limited Supply it's very hard to find somebody who wants to go through the act of carrying a child for somebody else but that definitely is a strategy that some people utilize especially if they're older or they're concerned that they might have a lower chance of implantation but they want to give themselves a try but if we look at one embryo 65% chance of success cumulative probability after the second is 88% okay almost everybody's pregnant after two and these are euploid genetically normal embryos okay and then if you go to the Third so cumulatively after three euploid embryo transfers each one being a single embryo 95% of people have a baby in their arms meaning the incidence of a current implantation failure is actually pretty low 5% but how many normal embryos do you need for what family size if you're freezing your eggs because you got 20 eggs at age 30 and the example I gave and you just made four normal embryos right so that's really unlikely to make three four kids it would it has a really good chance of making one gives you the opportunity for a second but that's also presuming that everything happened perfectly that the sperm is not pot smoking sperm but you know what I mean not bad quality sperm there's not other environmental issues when it comes to your own health when you're trying to get pregnant or other diseases you may have so we really need a higher number of eggs specifically when we don't know what the equation will truly look like for one individual person when they go through the process and one of the only added benefits of embryos especially if you are partnered if you're with somebody who you do want to have children with you just don't want to have them yet is that I know the downstream I know the number I know how many embryos I have and if it's not enough to give you a high chance of what you want your family to be you can intervene now right because by definition with egg phrasing we're not wanting to be pregnant for years so if you're doing this with a partner and you're making embryos and now I say we only got one genetically normal embryo you have the opportunity to choose to either go through more cycles and store more embryos for later to maybe try to get pregnant sooner because there's some underlying issue with your fertility you can make a choice because you're falling off the curve there could ask you a question so this uh you mentioned age about 32 33 in an ideal circumstance with the finances there Etc one would Harvest um eggs unless they're already starting a family through natural means um what about for sperm I mean we we've all heard the studies that uh with increased age of the sperm that there's a higher although still statistically pretty small in sense of things like um Spectrum conditions um so do you recommend to younger males um uh men in their late 20s early 30s to freeze sperm I mean it's never going to be wrong to save your gametes because we don't have crystal balls for the future right so your gametes are your eggs in your sperm that increase and we'll just say negative outcome from Advanced paternal age really starts to be seen at age 50 so most men are not looking at primarily starting their family after that age however what I run into all the time is maybe you're working on a second family or maybe life has gone down a different pathway and now you're with a partner who potentially is younger and wants to conceive and you now have older sperm having sperm in the bank is so cheap and easy to freeze sperm eggs I haven't even answered your primary question and the process of collecting sperm well well not entirely um without its issues is is far it's embarrassing at best but it's much simpler yeah it's much simpler there's generally doesn't require hormone injections although you know maybe for rare instances where people are hypogonadal or something but if you're gonna freeze your sperm you're right you typically you're going to get some blood work done because most places that store sperm per FDA guidelines have to make sure that if you carried an infectious disease it's stored in a special tank so you have to get blood work done then you have to abstain for your two to three days collect into a cup you're done which by the way guys you can do it home and bring it in sper is so stable if you've ever done this you just bring it in it's pretty bit a little bit of I think I'm I'm I'm not going to feain that that my friend did this and told me but you know it's it's kind of outrageously easy in sense that you just bring it in and they'll like take it out in the lobby and be like is that your name and they'll do like very different than the egg collection procedure so here's here's what I'll say about sperm and what I wish Mor men knew slm men de if you're going to get a vasectomy because you are choosing that you don't want to have kids and we see many men who do this they say they don't want to have kids they want to go get a vasectomy yet later on in life you don't have a crystal ball about life is dynamic and things can change if you're going to get a vasectomy Go free sperm first why are so many men getting vasectomies I don't have the answer to that I think I had heard this yeah a lot of men are getting vasectomies even I think to just take control over not having a child out there when they don't want to so maybe this explains the drop in birth rates I'm just I'm just kidding multifactorial so many people even if you're in your family let's say you have two kids and y'all decided you're going to get the vasectomy so that you don't have any more children things happen terrible things happen life changes there might be a circumstance where you potentially would have another kid if something really bad happened or you just changed your mind freezing sperm is so easy and so much easier than if you don't not all vasectomy reversals work especially the longer that it's been reversed the lower the likelihood that it's actually going to work and very often if it does you don't get sperm in sufficient levels for timed intercourse and you're seeing me in the office and and freezing sperm is cheap I mean it's relatively cheap it's like $400 right so it's it's much much cheaper Allin than the entire egg freezing process so to answer the original question when you go through egg freezing most people do fantastic and we'll just use egg freezing and IVF interchangeably here because what you as a person is going through to harvest your eggs or to take them out of your body is exactly the same right the distinction between egg freezing and IVF is all about what happens on the lab end of it after they've come out of your body so if we have this group of eggs that comes out of the Vault your body doesn't want to allow them all to grow even if it's a low number right that's the check and balance to not have so many kids so we need to override that process and what we tend to do with this is to use a combination of hormonal medications and very often I describe it to patients as suppressing your body and then stimulating it so if I can temporarily stop the production of FSH and you have a group of eggs come out of the Vault and we can imagine that FSH is their food and there is no food because you're taking the birth control pill for 3 weeks these eggs are going to synchronize be very small be very hungry for lack of a better word their FSH receptors are going to open all up it's like a nest of baby birds that are all now starving instead of the hungry bird gets the worm so now we go with this suppression period for a few weeks we can come in and give gonadotropins which is FSH and LH FSH is now synthetically made in a lab it's very easy it's a synthetic compound that mimics the structure of the brain FSH we actually can't synthetically make LH very interesting we don't have a way to make it yet and so we use the purified urine of menopausal women because when you're in menopause your FSH and LH levels are naturally so high because they're trying to get that egg to make some estrogen so um here are some the we've covered male hormone health before um and there's been a discussion of HCG human chonic gatot trop and and which is essentially mimics LH in the receptor it does yes all right so is um pregal at uh human chonic gatot tropen is it purified from postmenopausal women's urine or is ITN it's synthetic HCG is synthetic and so what why can't well I'm talking about it's called minpure Min minip pure is a combination of FSH and LH the reason why we give HCG to men to try to stimulate the spermatogenesis process which of course if we could just give LH we'd give LH it's the same reason why we give HCG for a trigger if we going to go through fertility treatments and we're trying to mimic that LH surge which naturally would cause ovulation we actually are giving HCG because it does mimic LH when it comes to the receptor action of it but when it comes to really especially in getting follicular development and the relationship between LH and FSH meaning LH is really providing some of the hormone substrate that we need to be able to make estrogen and so you really need some LH in a lot of people depending on your protocol or if you're older and you're naturally making less the example or the offshoot would be like the PCOS patient who has some naturally High LH sometimes they don't actually need LH and their protocol so who are these postmenopausal women that are supplying their urine they're paid yeah I S imagine them on some Island some yeah yeah go to the menopause getting paid to urinate and it's called menure like it's purified menopausal urine right wild most people don't know that they know now now they know and so we use FSH and LH we'll just say in lack of better terms those are the two primary compounds that we're giving over the course of on average a 12 day period to get the follicles to grow and the eggs to mature so you can measure egg maturity by blood levels of estradiol and by transvaginal ultrasound so when you're going through egg freezing or IVF you're taking these hormone shots of FSH and LH and they are getting those follicles to start to grow the eggs are starting to mature we're monitoring them along the way trying to determine the time period where we think most of the eggs will be in the mature range these eggs have gotten to maturity you then are going to take a trigger shot which allows that final stage of meiosis so those chromosomes can separate right we think about the egg we remember that normal female genetics it's 46xx and I always think about in the egg that these chromosomes are lined up your eggs are Frozen inside your body when you're born your eggs are in metaphase of meiosis so that's when metaphase chromosomes meet in the middle and they're held apart by these myotic spindles and this is why eggs are so stink and fragile because they're held like this and those myotic spindles just absorb the wear and tear of your life but when you use that trigger shot that LH surge naturally or that HCG in a cycle that's when you're going to get that final separation into half the eggs you know half those chromosomes into the egg so for people listening think about um like a zipper and you're pulling apart of a of a zipper that then you now have the the chromosomes just one one you now have have the chromosomes because why because successful fertilization the other chromosomes are going to come from sperm the sperm and that's why this process has more error the older you are and the longer your chromosomes have been sitting there because those spindles are going to break down and we're going to have that increase in anupy like we already said purely because of this impact can I ask a question about that specifically I think now would be the right time to ask which is that my understanding is that a lot of the Dynamics of pulling apart of this zipper like thing these chromosomes and then um is related the mitochondrial DNA um because there are a lot of mechanics we're literally talking about an egg splitting itself you know in half Mitri is its Powerhouse the the mitochondrial and so mitochondrial health is a big topic these days um and so we will be sure to touch on nutrition supplementation and prescription drugs that impact mitochondrial Health but I've heard of a new procedure um called three parent um IVF where they're taking basically the DNA from the intended mom the DNA from intended dad um and then putting it into a a surrogate like a donor egg that is where the DNA has been sucked out and then you know because it has Health healthier younger uh mitochondrial DNA so you're essentially um let's say you've got a a couple in their like let's say late 30s early 40s and they're not getting successful embryos or implantations or whatever things aren't working they'll take the DNA from Mom and Dad and they'll and they'll they'll merge it with a third parent um encapsulation that there are clinics that do this I know that um a lot of this was actually being done in Eastern Europe until until recently um Mexico offers there are places in Mexico that do this uh in England it's been used to um solve uh mitochondrial dysfunction um but in the US this is still not legal is that right yes so the purpose of what you're talking about essentially when we think about utilizing um a donor mitochondrial or a donor egg the point of that technology existed to help cure mitochondrial diseases which are 100% fatal and so you would have this subset of people who would because if you're the mom you always pass on your mitochondria to all of The Offspring so if there's disease inherent in your mitochondria everybody's going to get it and these are very severe diseases so the idea of this was first to say hey can we overcome this mitochondria disease and give people the opportunity which it has done that right now so it works when done properly when done properly especially for that purpose now that purpose is distinct because those people aren't infertile right there's something else going on within their mitochondrial disease utilizing that technology to overcome age related changes in the eggs has not been successful yet are we hopeful that it can will people charge you money for it in certain places yes but you're you're hitting on a really important topic is that the political environment of embryo research in the United States makes it extremely hard for us to be the pioneers of new technology in this space and that is because a lot of views about an embryo or when does Life Begin that happens here in the US that results in limiting the availability and the possibility of doing research in a meaningful way on human embryos right because it would require the destruction of a lot of of and it would also and you know I looked into this a little bit as a from an academic perspective um to be clear um it would also require that um that the abortions be performed differently because suction abortions destroy embryos in ways that extraction abortions don't so there's a very controversial topic I mean it's um it's something that maybe we'll return to in an episode about stem cells in the future yeah it's fascinating because especially if you look at IVF whole separate issue is that there's millions of embryos that people are no longer using because they have had success they had extra embryos in the bank they got divorced a variety of reasons and a lot of people would like to donate their embryos to science feel like hey I don't want to have this embryo implanted I don't want to carry this child but potentially could something good or could it help Advance the field build but that's not really a tangible option when people do that what is actually happening is their embryos are being utilized to train embryologists which is valid right to teach them how to thaw and freeze and biopsy and do different things so it's still useful but it's not in a meaningful way like we'd really love to be able to utilize to advance the science especially for these embryos that have been created yet people no longer need them for family growth so what happens to all the embryos that people don't use oh it's fantastic question right now they sit in storage this well this is a new problem okay IVF is only 40ish years old embryo freezing alone right the first IVF we haven't even gone through the whole process but the first IVF baby there's no FSH LH to stimulate more of the eggs outside the Vault to grow so they followed the single follicle and they didn't have the procedure which we do now which is a minimally invasive procedure to extract eggs we go vaginally with a needle attached to the ultrasound and we enter into each follicle and we drain it the very first IVF you followed one follicle and you went in abdominally with a surgery to get put that needle into the follicle and drain it out and give that just one egg a chance and then of course there was no embryo freezing originally so the field is still rather young to understand some of this and as technology rapidly improves we see things like better success rates with freezing and Tha embryos better process of getting more embryos to grow but now we have a lot of embryos in storage that may or may not be used I personally tell people you should keep your embryos you should pay the storage fee until no matter what the worst thing on planet Earth happens to you you're down having children because sadly I live in a spectrum with my field where I see a lot of sadness and people who maybe have lost a child something else is happened and they have maybe a sibling who they feel like they really want to give this sibling child the chance to be a sibling again and often you're much older when you're experiencing this and if you had had embryos Frozen that you could have used but you got rid of them you're going to be really upset if you find yourself in that circumstance so I always say you should save them until you know that you are not going to need them and then what do you do with them most people just discard them some people will donate them to last which is called for research but mostly it's for embryologist training to get better at doing which is also important okay um but embryo donation is a new thing so being able to just like we have people who donate sperm and donate eggs embryo donation is the next evolution of an opportunity to allow more people to become parents it's a little bit of the Wild West people finding people in Facebook groups and connecting it's this whole other Dynamic when it comes to what we call third party reproduction or you know what do you do with known donors and things like that but it's a very interesting concept so this problem is emerging as the technology is getting better I I'm realizing now um remembering rather that when I was in college and graduate school you would see these um ads in the student paper fre for egg donors and sperm donors um sperm regenerate throughout the lifespan so that's a kind of less controversial issue but this is now not allowed most places to advertise for for egg donors on college campuses that's my understanding um the egg donors were often paid whatever whatever they were paid I'm not going to say it was reasonable amounts or not because I don't I don't recall what they were paid everyone's circumstances are different but the argument that most people use against this is oh these these people are giving up eggs that they could otherwise use but we now know that's not true so um do you have any knowledge as to like what was the um the rationale for for kind of limiting the recruitment of egg donors um anyway I'm not arguing for or against I just I it's no longer supported based on what You' said by the um by the argument that they're losing eggs they would otherwise be able to some of it's about proper informed consent uh especially at an age where the financial incentive can be very persuasive without understanding that Mak sense not that it harms your fertility later but that you're going to have genetic children out there and you might potentially and we are seeing this now we don't know if you individually will have infertility for a variety of reasons because you're not trying to have a family until much later but the same concern doesn't seem to exist for men who are donating sperm like I mean it should there's this whole donor Community where people are really talking about putting new restrictions on will use sperm donation for example there are sperm donors who have hundreds of children hundreds right they are these sibling pods because it's been so unlimited and sperm banks are a business that work to make money and they make money by selling more sperm but that's not healthy one for a population you need genetic diversity but also it's not healthy necessarily for one person to have all these have siblings and to just not know when you're going to run into somebody who could potentially be your sibling is it this guy at the bar that you like do you have to worry about that if you're donor conceived so we're starting to see sperm banks finally start to reel back and put limitations on how many families total children's tough right because one family might have a child and you want them to be able to have sibling children but at least for how many families that that donor can contribute to and we're seeing sperm donors deal with the fact that now there's no Anonymous donation we can act like Anonymous donation exists meaning it is not identified at the time that somebody's utilizing the sperm but with you know direct to Consumer Testing for genetics like 23 and me and ancestry people are being connected with their sperm donors with their egg donors with their sibling pods and we have to believe that technolog is only going to improve over time so what people do for money especially when they're young I think without understanding the potential ramifications and I don't want to act like sperm donation or egg donation are bad they give people the opportunity to become parents that otherwise might not be able to and that is a lovely and a beautiful gift but you need to understand what that might mean and how that might impact your own potential children later too to know that they have genetic half siblin out there egg donation people do get compensated much better than sperm donation there are certain characteristics that are hard to find that get compensated even more so and certain you know ethnicities Doctorate Degrees and things like that where somebody can really pay for their education by donating their eggs it's a it's a dilemma because what you'd love to say is like free some eggs for you too if you're going to do that you're at the perfect age to freeze your own eggs and there's been strategies to try to mitigate this and I don't want to get off too much on a tangent but it's a really fine line that you walk with what people understand so there is a company and I won't name them but they are promoting that young women donate their eggs and they will freeze half of them for you and half of them will go and become donor eggs interesting business model but I could see the potential ethical concerns I think ethically this sounds good because you get to freeze some eggs but I think more people will donate eggs than otherwise would have for some of the reasons we previously stated and I also think you would get more money by simply donating your eggs and then turning around and paying for a round of freezing your own eggs you would get paid more and you'd have more eggs because one of the issues is do do you now falsely believe that you have enough eggs in the bank because you did this split but you don't really have enough because we already walked through the math at 20 eggs doesn't really result in such a high probability of having a multi-child family so you know there's a lot of ethical debate in gam and embryo donation it definitely is the wild west and there's a Uncharted Territory even an embryo donation there's places who are very unethical about it who will only allow people to have embryos if they are heterosexual been married for 3 years make a certain income submit to a home study yet they let the people have no say over the embryos that are transferred be it how many what stage what quality and they are taking people's money and putting terrible embryos inside of them and really wasting their resources which could have been used in another way yeah the dangers of propertization of biology right and Tech I mean Tech entering spaces is amazing but also technology start to advance before studies right Tech is going to become has more Finance backing than we see scientific studies get I feel like one of the major questions out there is whether or not IVF babies let's just call them that have a higher incidence of things like um Spectrum conditions uh or other developmental trajectories let's call them and I'm not trying to be politically correct here but you know I think nowadays the the the word um disorder has to be like really carefully examined when considering any uh neurologic um and psychiatric um situation um you know we've had discussions about this on this podcast before but but a lot of people are wondering just to be to be direct a lot of people are wondering do more IVF babies have autism um than non-ivf babies is this a good question and it's changed over time in a couple different ways and I think this is important to understand so if we just think about the hormonal environment with natural conception and you know you have a peak estrogen let's say of 200 something you have progesterone being made the placenta is implanting and what is the main difference with IVF babies and a lot of it has been tied back to the uterine environment especially in what we call Fresh embryo transfers which is really not a common practice anymore so in a fresh Embryo transfer I'm going to take the eggs out of your body fertilize them in the lab and grow out embryos and then I'm going to put the best embryo back in your body 5 days later at the natural time of implantation and if we rewind the clock that's how IVF was done right when you couldn't freeze embryos very well and they didn't survive and you would put lots of embryos inside because they wouldn't survive and that's the early days of IVF when you saw a lot of multiples a lot of high order multiples and of course multiples have their own distinct issues that put them at higher risk for developmental disorders and issues with development and birth RIS in general right they're they're common to be fair they're commonly referred to as as disorders I just think um around autism in particular there is there's a camp a growing camp out there that um want want it referred to differently we we've covered this uh anytime this comes up I bring up both just to highlight the fact that yes we are aware and sensitive to that emerging issue right now unfortunately for sake of conversation there's no new nomenclature so we could easily get um caught down in in the in the attempt to try and like you know um smooth over everything with everybody and and it as a consequence confuse everybody so I think we'll go for clarity forward with the understanding that the nomenclature is changing can't even say alcoholism anymore because it's alcohal use disorder and I don't have a problem with that but a lot of people wonder if those are two different things and it's just confusing and we want to simplify science for people exactly so feel free so when we first were doing IVF we're putting embryos back in an extremely unnatural environment if you have 20 eggs growing and each egg makes 200 pams of estrogen suddenly now you have these extremely high super physiologic estrogen levels higher progesterone levels because there's more Corpus ludum and this environment is not the normal for how the placenta would invade into that maternal blood circulat and a lot of these issues that are commonly associated became so because of placental issues so a lot of things like growth restriction small for gestational age pre-term birth which further puts you at risk for other developmental disorders were associated with these fresh transfers the field has changed we do a lot of frozen embryo transfers and a lot of it for this reason we see huge Improvement in neonatal outcomes when you bleed off that high hormonal uterine environment and then regrow the lining of the uterus and a hormonal level that's more natural and then transfer the embryo and we see completely different fetal outcomes so that's fantastic as far as looking at the change over the field but of course if you take all IVF babies over all time it's a little murky because you have modern practice and old practice we also know that infertility people if you get diagnosed with infertility so you're under age 35 and you try to get pregnant with regular periods for one year and have not had success or you're 35 and older and you've tried for 6 months you've not had success you meet the medical definition for infertility when that happens you now statistically regardless if you get pregnant naturally in the next month or you do IVF you have a 1% higher chance of birth effects and you have a slightly higher chance of Developmental disorders so is it more populationbased versus procedure based and there's probably something to that to underline a lot of potentially what goes in or what can cause infertility when it comes to you know quality of eggs or sperm or uterine environment or things that we're still learning about when it comes to autism specifically the number one strongest Association we have is Advanced paternal age so when you look at the people and the male sperm comes from an ejaculation after age 50 that one does have the highest significance associated with autism and also with some other very interesting autismal dominant disorders so we don't want to take Advanced paternal age likely although it does get so much less attention than what we call Advanced maternal age or being over age 35 in a woman and that is purely because of the differences in the sperm and the Egg environment and how their quality is impactful thank you for that answer I think um it's really important for people to hear that uh because you know the the lore out there is that IVF higher incidents of of autism in IVF babies but it sounds like a a good percentage of those um could be because of age related factors um as well as technology related factors that um and that the technology is getting better all the time um if I understood correctly uh we didn't complete the discussion of of IVF and I want to do that talk about ixie and a few other things I know that's that's definitely your wheelhouse before we do that can we inject a little sub conversation um around this because uh I neglected to bring this up earlier and I know there's a lot of curiosity about this and then we'll and then we'll uh finish off IVF can we do that sort of a pause in the IVF so the eggs are out they're frozen sperm's out it's frozen or maybe they're going to put um live sperm on non-frozen excuse me uh sperm directly onto those unfrozen eggs we'll pause there intermission for those um potential embryos um and talk about something that you've been um very uh open about which is um and a lot of people are not not frankly in your profession so I really appreciate this which is nutrition and supplementation to optimize the the health of uh egg quality and and not just for people who want to get pregnant but for but for people who believe that fertility is a proxy for overall health so I mean are there things that people should eat and not eat um things that people should supplement and not supplement in order to um optimize their fertility I mean this is definitely an interest of mine right all my fellowship research go around fundability and natural fertility and I think we really do a disservice by how medicine really is categorized by organ systems because we act like things in one place don't impact the other as if right but it's you have a body and your body and especially your hormones change and fluctuate and they're meant to they are meant to be a dynamic system but the world and the environment of which you are subjecting your body to has proven change es on both hormonal function and also when it comes to egg and sperm quality and so if you are somebody who just wants to live your healthiest life and have your most regular periods and have your hormones as well balanced as they can be for a lack of a better word we'll just say that that means that they're functioning normally then paying attention to the things that you do are really important and so I know this is a big one for you sleep is probably the number one thing that people don't do that does impact their reproductive hormone system and therefore can impact egg and sperm quality because sleep is when you have cellular repair and when you can drop your inflammation levels we know that inflammation is just toxic to eggs and sperm it is the inflammatory environment is not ideal for conception and then for a female you have to deal with the fact that you have your egg quality but you also have how inflammation or what you're exposed to impacts your uterine environment so you have a a twofold situation here so none of this should be shocking news when it comes to nutrition but it is not talked about enough you're right decreasing inflammation by the foods that we put in our body is consistently shown with an improvement in fundability an improvement in ovulation and an improvement in success with IVF and a decrease in miscarriage right huge Studies have looked at these now the Vic caveat is that nutrition studies are super hard because people who consume flax for example tend to have other good health behaviors that sometimes make it hard to identify what flax did versus their General Health versus somebody who eats fast food every day so nutrition studies tend to be observational and Fertility Studies are really hard too because what inpoint are you using is it getting pregnant is it live birth are you looking at IVF are you looking at natural fertility and we have a lot of different overlap that makes both of these a little bit difficult and so they're all cohort based or population based studies where you analyze how people perform when it comes to fertility treatments or getting pregnant naturally based on their exposures to certain things diets high in fruits and vegetables are good for you right fiber antioxidants fruit is not bad fruit got this really bad reputation really I love fruit I love fruit too but people think that it has sugar and that it's bad for you it has fructose but no it's not that type of sugar is not bad for you if we can just agree on the fact that fruit has a lot of nutritional benefit especially when it comes to vitamins and antioxidants that can be extremely beneficial in decreasing inflammation grains so whole grains especially that your body you know provide a lot of great fiber so of course if you have Celiac or you're gluten intolerant you're a different category but there was so much focus on keto and people eliminating grains as a food group overall and even though that might be UTI itiz in a dietary strategy to lose weight and losing weight can improve fertility likely because of inflammation being the primary driver because we know that even in studies where I take donor eggs and I transfer that embrio into somebody who's overweight they have lower odds of success than if they were a normal BMI so we can't act like that causation is just on egg quality from obesity right there's also some inflammation some inflammatory changes that impact the body's ability or desire to allow an embryo to implant so fruits veggies whole grains are all good interestingly you know dairy dairy tends to be okay in most studies but what we do see is that if you're going to have dairy have whole have the real thing the processed Dairy the skim milk that actually decreases your fertility and likely because the pro processing to make it still look like milk when you take out the fat is adding in things that are unnatural potentially impacting your fertility I don't drink milk anymore but when I was a teenager I drank half and half I'm not recommending anyone do that remember I was a skin teenager I was you were trying to bul up well no I just could afford to I wasn't trying at that age I wasn't trying to at all but um it was just delicious um but so cheeses um whole uh full fat milk yogurt half and half yogurt okay yeah but don't don't choose the skim one choose the actual one that comes with some of the milk fat fat is not bad for you there's also this right hopefully we're getting away from it but there's been such a lowfat craze or this real attention that fat is so bad but fat comes in so many important forms avocados and oils and nuts Dairy meat fat and cholesterol are the backbone for all hormones right so you need that in order for your body to make the estrogen and progesterone that it needs to allow this whole process to happen and so there's this idea that those are bad for you that's just really not so healthy fats whole grains fruits veggies and what about proteins and meats because I think within those categories you know I a big fan of sustainably you know like raised Meats if if if possible some people choose not to eat meat but fish eggs um love it all okay so let's just go through the meats and the myth and the fact so we'll do Toof food so there's this big you that like tofu has soy and that too much soy can be bad because soy can be a phytoestrogen tofu does not negatively impact fertility even in Men In fact it can improve it because it does have some antioxidant like properties lots of iron when it comes to fish fish are fantastic sources of healthy fats and omega-3 fatty acids which are very crucial in the reproductive process we do worry about if you're pregnant having too much fish and overexposure to Mercury and how that can impact fetal brain development so the general recommendation is three servings per week that doesn't let me guess a serving is like four to six ounces as opposed to like a real human that eats you know a real human yeah that eats yeah that eats you know you know 6 to eight ounces of fish right and I think it's important to say even though people will tell you that when you're trying to get pregnant with the idea of we don't know when you're going to be pregnant if you're going through things like egg freezing or IVF and you know when you're going to be pregnant I wouldn't feel like you have to restrict yourself on the consumption of seafood during those time periods when you know you're not pregnant yet because really the concern is about that mercury and what it could potentially do to a fetal brain and raw seafood correct no sushi no Sashimi well when you're pregnant correct and that's mostly because of the risk of infectious disease that can cause you know severe brain development and other issues what do they do in Japan I don't know I don't live there they probably laugh at this they probably do laugh at us they probably do laugh at us someone who's who's um uh been pregnant in Japan yeah reach out tell us yeah or conceived in Japan tell us don't tell us the story of the conception like but tell us tell us did you have Sashimi overall meat is a really broad category and studies study it differently like is it all meat are you distinguishing out red meat and chicken are you putting it all together I mean obviously I think we can all come to the agreement that processed meats are not good for a variety of different reasons in addition to being carcinogenic those toxins do negatively impact fertility now so deli meat no bueno so yeah but and specifically those things like the bacon and the pro like the things that are really highly prosty hot dogs sorry the Fourth of July hot dog picnic but those things really do not provide nutritional advantages and only harm especially then when we have red meat for the most part red meat when isolated individually in most circumstances is in moderation tends to be fine I usually tell my patients I want them to eat a plant forward diet but that doesn't mean no meat but I say look at your meat servings I don't want it red meat every single day because there was a study looking at IVF and looking at embryos and the more servings a lot of nutritional studies base things on cortile so who eats the lowest and the second most and the third most the topmost and people who ate in that top cortile of red meat had lower progression of embryos through the culture so less embryos that developed less normal embryos and lower success rates and do we know anything about the how that meat was arriving are we talking about like like hogy sandwiches are we talking about like grass-fed Stakes right the studies are not wonderful but that doesn't mean that they don't hold Merit in helping us guide counseling but no that one was how many servings of red meat do you eat in a week right so we don't really know does the really ethically sourced the grass-fed you know this environment which we feel like is much less toxic than potentially let's say like a cattle Factory where the cows are injected with all sorts of things is there a difference and how those impact your reproduction probably right if this cow's getting injected with a lot of hormones why are we thinking that it's not impacting the meat that you're then ingesting into your body no I think our audience will certainly um subscribe to that uh idea I think most of them will I mean the notion that like the pollutants you breathe in the air somehow are not the the air that you breathe into your lungs is is just like completely and the idea people feel that way and they hold strongly to this idea that it can't be this thing that I love that is causing this problem right the denial of the association between what we put in and on our body and how it impacts our body's function is really strong in some people and I think it's really just lack of education and awareness because the medical community for so long did not address these factors right your doctor never talked to to you about nutrition and so it just became this idea that it must not matter otherwise your doctor would talk to you about it I think sugar is the last thing I just didn't mention but added sugar and artificial sugars are bad for you artificial sugars artificial sugars too so including stevio or plant-based art low calorie sweeteners Stevia itself hasn't been studied as much as the other ones things like sweeten low all of those mhm but what we do know is that they interfere they cause inflammation inside the body and then they also cause can cause a stress reaction and they can cause higher rates of miscarriage when you intake more sugar and artificial sugar so that's a lot to wrap your head around and I say the same thing to every patient one cake one this one hot dog I mean those things individually are not going to make a difference right it's the choices that you make every single day that are going to set you up to be your Healthy self or not and so you should make choices in line with how you want to treat yourself you want to be in your best health you want your hormones functioning the best and if that added helps you get pregnant when you want to helps you have a better chance of success with IVF oh my gosh what a fantastic benefit but that doesn't mean you can't enjoy some of these bad things here and there as long as you've set yourself up on the dayto day where you're giving your body lots of nutritious food that it needs to make hormones similarly being you know very underweight and calorie restricting we all know is really terrible for your reproductive system and can cause the brain to totally shut down ovulation because it senses that you can't have a pregnancy do people Mis carry excuse me for um by virtue of being underweight does the body like like I learned um some years ago I think this is still true that one of the signals for the onset of puberty in females is that leptin um a hormone is secreted from body fat yeah um that then signals to the brain to the hypothalamus like okay it's you know there's enough reserves to create uh environment it's a signal about environmental um yeah there's enough extra fat to have a baby yeah and there's presumably enough food around uh to sustain that baby right our miscarriages and lack of body fat correlated on both ends of the spectrum yes right so lack of body fat and being overweight we see decrease in getting pregnant per month and we see increase in losing pregnancies so certainly there is a healthy medium where your body has what it needs and that makes sense because if you have I like to even say hypothalamic dysfunction so maybe your brain's not totally shut off or it's sending out no hormones and you're not ovulating because you're not getting pregnant in that circumstance but certainly ovulation disorders are on a spectrum where you go from a perfectly synchronized cycle to one that prolongs it you know gets shorter together then prolongs and then you have nothing there's the spectrum of dysfunction which is representing your hormones not being necessarily perfect and that can have impacts on the placenta trying to grow into that uterus I mean the placenta is fascinating right an entire talk just on the placenta but it has it does this incredible job where your body has to not reject it yet allow it to eat away at the side of your uterus and grow into your blood vessels but that requires a very specific hormonal environment for it to be done and to be done right I think in the same breath of all this what you're also asking is yeah okay so that's eating healthy none of that's really new news for most people a lot of those things I just said well I think so but I do want to thank you because I think um rarely if ever do we hear somebody so a physician be really direct about like Hey listen some red meat yes not excessive amounts of rat ideally from uh sustainable sources whole fat milk products grains fruits vegetables I mean those kind of um straight what like to you seem like straightforward directives are are actually pretty rare in in the landscape of of Public Health discussion because um more often than not people talk about nutrition in these kind of Elimination Diet type things like you know eliminate all the grains or eliminate all the meat or um you know eliminate all the milk milk fats when in reality I think people forget that like most people out there are omnivores and they can make better choices about not deli meat you know less bacon if any bacon right have some veggies with your lunch right like you can make better choices on the day-to- day I think that that is a great point I think there's a place for supplements I think the big disclaimer that everybody's going to say with supplements is that they are not regulated like the way medications are right and I will say supplements and herbs are different things right a supplement but many companies are adding herbs to their supplements and that can get into really murky territory especially when it comes to how some of these herbs do have estrogen and progestin like properties and can impact reproduction and hormones and perhaps even androgenic properties too so we can't act like everything's created equal so I always tell people if I recommend you take a supplement or your doctor does your due diligence is to look at what is also included and make sure it doesn't have these extra added things that they're unaware of because sometimes they can have negative impact at one stage of your life or another depending on where you are certainly you know a prenatal vitamin which has folic acid we all know that folic acid is really important to prevent neural tube defects but it's also important in cell division and how the ovary is growing follicles and growing eggs so should people women but also men be taking a vitamin with folic acid even when they're not trying to conceive there's no harm in having it but very often pregnancies occur when you're not trying to conceive and that is a store that needs to be built up 3 months ahead of time so we really need you to be taking that ahead of getting pregnant so not just let's get pregnant right now I'm going to start this prenatal vitamin so I recommend anybody who's in their reproductive years take a prenatal vitamin we also know that many many people are vitamin D deficient and vitamin D does impact reproduction and so I usually say a thousand international units of vitamin D is not going to be harmful in anybody it's going to be helpful for most people some people definitely need higher levels so we screen everybody with a vitamin D to see who needs to have extra but you know a blanket statement that extra vitamin D is going to be helpful omega-3 fatty acids also extremely important in one being anti-inflammatory but two brain development of a fetus so most prenatals now actually do have those omega-3 fatty acids in them but if they don't I recommend a patient take those just a brief um question insertion there the um there's a laboratory up at the University of California Santa Barbara that's published some really interesting data showing that you a essentially brain weight which is just but one indirect measure of brain health but brain weight in uh at Birth seems to be correlated at least in some positive way with the amount of essential fatty acids that mom consume during pregnancy does that sound does that yeah I mean that does hold and there's like there's my studies about that mice are smarter when they have diets you know with omega-3 fatty acids when they are in utero right so the exposure in the time period is really important and Omega-3s have a lot of health benefits when it comes to their antioxidant properties especially in like an endometriosis diseases that are very highly inflammatory they can be very benef icial we're definitely going to talk about your work about after baby has arrived and impact of essential fatty acids but what would you say is the dosage cut off um on this podcast before I've sort of thrown out numbers like one one to two grams per day of the EPA form of essential fatty acid and we could have a whole discussion about omega3 omega-6 ratios but do you do you think there's a upper limit is is it truly that you know let's say up to four gram per day of EPA um is would that be advantageous is it better than 1 G I tell people a gram a gram okay that's in alignment with pretty much what we've talked about before so that's what I recommend you know when I give my hand out to my patients and they're trying to get pregnant it's going to have a prenatal a thousand IUS of vitamin D a gram of Omega-3s and then CoQ10 so CQ town which you know essentially in general is trying to help the mitochondria that's the whole idea here that it is helping Provide support across the body in a lot of different ways right like kuten is used in a lot of different areas of the body but when it comes to reproduction when it comes to meiosis and cell division and ovulation and egg quality and even sperm quality there's a place for CoQ10 showing benefit without harm right and so no we said earlier nothing's without any harm or any risk of harm but very very little so I usually recommend if you're trying to get pregnant and you take cq1 a dose of 200 milligrams three times a day so there kind of a higher dose than sometimes people are on um often and prenal now have just like 200 total in it and so the the expensive ingredients are usually the the uh the lower concentrations just enough so they can put it on the label right includes Co CoQ10 um does the form of CoQ10 matter because you'll find them in gel capsules you'll find also find them in um powdered capsules I always say I mean there might be for the individual person I mean absorption of medication is really depending a lot on gut health and other factors but the number one issue with supplementation is that people don't stick to it so I always say whichever one you're going to consistently take is going to be the better form great um a question about El carnitine um and researching a little bit for this episode and others I you know oral lcarnitine has been associated with some improvements in forward motility and sperm maybe egg quality um but we know that a very small percentage of the oral ALC carnitine that one ingests is actually um utilized so some people actually purchase and use injectable lartin which is kind of painful because it's in an call-based suspension so not not not comfortable it's got to be done intramuscularly but my read of the data is kind of impressive I wouldn't say super impressive are you ever injecting um patients or having them inject themselves with El cartine um this would be both male uh female or male patients or both um or using oral carnitine or do the data just not impress you enough to to motivate that we use a gram of ELC carnitine with a gram of vitamin C for our male patients who have any abnormal sperm parameter and so that is kind of what we consider the sperm enhancement protocol and so and just that that with the multivitamin so those two with the multivitamin and CoQ10 so that's kind of like the male protocol of course there's different specifics for one individual person I don't tend to recommend it for most females that being said those who have endometriosis fall into a unique category where inflammation is so high that usually it's a different environment where we recommend lcarnitine and cinee vitamin c and e they kind of fall into a different category because they have a known inflammatory disease but if we're just talking about the person at whole who maybe wants to take some supplements for their reproductive Health that have very little side effects and for the most part can potentially be helpful it's going to be you know CoQ10 El carnitine vitamin C can be helpful especially for the male for the female partner we're going to be looking at that extra vitamin D in addition to the prenatal with folic acid what about a women with PCOS I get so many questions about PCOS osol so um and there are we talking myosl or the what is it the dyro do I have that right you do have that right myosl is the main driver of a nosl and how it can be helpful if you most Blends are going to have a combination of both of them but a much higher ratio of myo andosol to deyro and so myo andosol is probably the one that really is doing the work in PCOS what is it doing it is definitely helping the body when it comes to insulin and sugar helping the body be more sensitive to insulin or less resistant to it essentially helping you respond to what you eat in a better way and also looks like it does potentially decrease some of that inflammation pathway in PCOS in PCOS this insulin resistance correlates with this testosterone production from the ovary meaning even met for alone can decrease testosterone levels based on some of the change that it has in the ovary take note men so many guys taking metformin or berberine thinking oh this is great I'm going to lower my blood sugar mimic fasting and live longer and and then these are also the same people who are riding to me go how come when I take metformin I either have headaches because I'm you know essentially hypo hypoglycemic but also their testosterone levels are are are getting crushed not in every case but it happens and I think those are things people just don't think about they read that a supplement might be beneficial for this one thing that doesn't apply to them and they start taking it so also the evidence on metform an extending life we had Peter t on you talk about this like the evidence for that is is like oh so poor it's just not really that convincing it may change but then now all the excitement is about rap ay and so you know uh extending your life while plummeting your testosterone you know I mean that's a actually that strategy has been tried in the longevity Community there's a there was this whole castration idea I don't this oh yeah this was like the heaven Gate cult where they castrated themselves did they longer well they ended up committing mass suicide so so um that you know they ended the experiment early um you know um yeah so in any event um going back to supplements sorry I couldn't help myself um supplements that um women can potentially take just to in increase their fertility even if they don't want to get pregnant as just kind of creating a milu of Health you talked about the nutrition you talked about CoQ10 maybe Al carnitine vitamin C um the essential fatty acids getting at least one gram of EPA so that might require taking two grams of of fish oil to get that the EPA uh myosl so how much are you talking about I've seen some pretty high dosages thrown out there for myos 200000 milligrams okay taken before sleep or does it matter that one doesn't matter that one doesn't matter thank you for covering the topic of supplements and supplementation um this is probably a good point to return back to those harvested eggs yeah so eggs are out um and there's a collection of them Frozen um maybe just maybe uh live they're always alive sorry um fresh sperm they call fresh fresh sperm they're not always alive some portion of the ejaculate is going to be um dead sperm right some live some for motile some non um for motile the twitchers I read is the name that hate those twitchers right um and so okay they're going to wash the the sperm why because yeah most of what people people see as ejaculate or no excuse me as ejaculate is um is not actually the sperm right okay so but sperm are washed they're in one compartment um you got the eggs out you you or your embryologist at your clinic is then going to at some point decide to combine them so is it kind of is it a sperm race or are you um maybe you could explain ixie and and why would one want why would one opt for ixie and is are there any risks with ixie because there you're really at some level this is the only place where I kind of sit back and okay somebody who you know St neural development like some level you're saying hey that sperm looks good whereas when you run a sperm race nature is saying hey this sperm really did beat all the other sperm so let's segue first because I think this is nice because the question I get asked all the time when we talk about nutrition and supplements and all of that is to you now you're doing IVF or you're freezing your eggs and what if what behaviors are good or bad of of course all of those same ones are but about how long do you need to do them and this is why if you live healthy most of the days it doesn't really matter because that's how you're living but we already know the sperm cycle is about 90 days and the eggs I like to say even though they're in the vault they become they start lining up getting ready to exit the Vault and become more susceptible to the things you're doing in that 90-day window and we know that to be true as well so they start to be pre-selected for who's coming out the next month they start to line up and so making these changes as you start thinking about getting pregnant doing fertility treatments is still extremely beneficial people will often say well I haven't been doing that so why start now it's not going to make a difference but truly it can or I'll drink up until the week until the day up I'll just I'll just get it in I know number people like I'm going to have my two glasses of wine which actually equates to about six glasses of wine when you measure out by much by the volume right right up until the week before getting pregnant or something like that but no so so people always ask what should I be doing it's these healthy behaviors and you should be doing them you know this whole time when we do IVF and I'm going to get all the things you just asked but earlier you said well how tolerable is it the truth is you're taking shots these are subcutaneous shots during the egg growth process so so next to the belly button yeah next to the belly button like how a diabetic gives insulin a very small needle I mean nobody loves shots but they're not a big intramuscular shot it's not like a flu shot or something like that listen I've been to Austin the Texan mosquitoes worse they hurt way worse than one of these needles exactly so you're going to use those medication for about 12 to 14 days you're going to have your follicles grow you're going to feel that so you're going to have pelvic pressure as your estrogen Rises you're also going to third space your fluid which means your fluid your water component of your blood is going to start to just eek out a little bit and you're going to get more bloated you're going to have more water weight you're going to feel feel puffier and that is very common just because of getting the eggs to grow you're going to mentally be fine cuz the female brain loves high estrogen so you're doing fine and that's one of the main concerns is how emotional will I be and during this phase of the process people do great when we take the eggs out of the body it's about a 20 minute procedure it is usually done under IV sedation like propal and Fentanyl and we are watching while we drain those follicles and get test tubes full of the eggs some people opt to not use any um say I hear the word Fentanyl and I'm sure a lot of people are like wait fentanyl crisis and I you know obviously fentanyl is a drug that has its uses um valid uses in the um medical community um does anyone just kind of opt for you know just I mean we have an anesthesiologist who is really talking to the patients I mean propal is the base of it certainly there's some patients who may want to avoid narcotic usage and they use different strategies I mean there was this huge right the retrievals podcast came out from like the new York Times doing a deep dive into a fertility clinic Yale where a nurse was siphoning off fenel for herself for herself and replacing it with saline and giving patients saline these this Clinic did not do anesthesia based propofol so they were supposed to just get fentel and have kind of a less pain environment not a no pain environment and not not just a few hundreds of women reported extreme pain extreme pain through the procedure really speaks large to pain not being taken seriously when they went and found this out what happened to I can't help but ask what happened to this uh technician well I mean yeah they're they're they're trying to find fentanyl Behind Bars yeah I mean and but it's huge as far as to like I mean I can't imagine I can't imagine doing I do this procedure like all the time right I've done thousands and thousands in my career and I can't imagine having people be in pain during it so it's but it's important to know that some clinics don't use IV sedation or they don't use propol they don't put you to sleep understanding what your clinic is using is really really important to set the expectations or to know am I going to be awake or am I going to be asleep can a patient ask you to what specific drugs are you going to give me to kill pain sure and I mean some clinics only do one like I am not going to do a retrieval under no sedation now some clinics would allow that some clinics that's all that they do but you that's a huge piece of the puzzle that you need to know if you're a patient are you going to be feeling pain not feeling pain what's it going to be like I'll say most clinics use propol and put patients to sleep and so you take a nice little nap for 15 to 20 minutes the eggs are retrieved from the follicles under direct visualization they're in test tubes you wake up and you're going to feel crampy and you'll get a period 10ish days later but you this is when you'll feel your worse and this is just the one thing I want to say about tolerability of it can you get pregnant in that time yeah yeah yeah and there's a a case report of an egg donor who was donating her eggs and she had sex with her boyfriend and because not every egg is always retrieved from the follicles or some small ones could ovulate too and she got pregnant with quintuplets whoa okay so you have to really tell people not to have intercourse one from an infectious standpoint because we really are poking you know a pretty large gauge needle through the vaginal mucosa into the perinal cavity so we don't want to introduce infection but also for pregnancy in that time period And if you got pregnant your risk of what we call ovarian hypers stimulation syndrome or ohss is very profound so what is normally happening is after the retrieval your estrogen and progesterone are going to drop you're going to feel a severe PMS for lack of a better word so when you'll be more emotional you're still pretty bloated until this all heals if you get ohss which is very uncommon in modern practice but when you did fresh embryo transfers or people who don't utilize some of the modern protocols this means that HCG continues to encourage all those follicles to make estrogen and progesterone and if you're pregnant you're just going to have a constant yet exponential increase in HCG and so this is going to get worse and worse so we really don't want people to get pregnant in that time period so when during that time period should they avoid sex so is it in the few days before extraction so typically I usually say it's from like day five of your stimulation okay so usually the earliest egg retrievals are kind of around cycle day 9 or 10 if somebody goes fast until your next period comes so that's usually about a 3 week time period where we want you to abstain from intercourse so for the most part though the more eggs you have the more you're going to feel both this hormonal and physical shift than the fewer eggs that you have so if you have a low egg count and you need to do IVF or Freez your eggs and you might do multiple Cycles or rounds you're going to tolerate it actually pretty fine because you're not going to have these huge shifts physically you're going to feel fine and that's always a big concern when you mentioned earlier about different stimulation types people have this idea that things that are more natural are better right just like this human thought that natural is good and synthetic is bad naturally you ovulate one egg a month when we're trying to get eggs out of your body the success is determined by how many eggs I can get and how young you are so it doesn't make sense in most circumstances to do a minimal stimulation protocol meaning purposefully under stimulating Somebody by saving them money and medication cost in order to purposely get fewer eggs because they're odds of getting the ultimate success of what they want is going to be so much lower is there I don't want you to be in the position of I don't want to put you rather in the position of kind of like having to demonize your your colleagues in your profession but I could see how there's a pretty significant financial incentive for people who are really desperate to have children or who just simply might want to have children down the road to um they hear low stem is better we're talking multiple low stem Cycles they might be um even a fraction of the cost of a full stim cycle but then there many many more got low Cycles you got it you can make a lot more money by doing things that are not in the best interest of the patient and I mean that's not uncommon in my field which is very sad but it does mean that because reproduction and IVF are so foreign and unknown so many people walk in blind not knowing if what they're being told really makes sense for their situation there are a couple situations where minimal stimulation makes sense if you're only going to make three eggs you're only going to make three eggs I don't need all the drugs in the world to tell your body to make three eggs CU there's only three and so that is a scenario where minimal stimulation does make sense and then there's the scenario where there's something called invocell has your research exposed you to this no invocell is a way to try to take IVF into making it more financially accessible for certain patient populations mainly people who don't ovulate like your very refractory PCOS patient who doesn't respond to medication or who have tubal Factor infertility right so your fallopian tubes are blocked because of chlamidia or endometriosis and we just have a problem here that egg and sperm can't get together because you're not ovulating or your tubes are blocked an invos cell it's a device that is plastic and you can fit up to 10 eggs in it and there's a little Middle Chamber where the sperm can go and so you go through this IVF process with the goal to only get 8 to 10 cuz that's what fits in the device and then you put the sperm in the middle of it and then you put it inside your vagina and you hold it in place it with a diaphragm and the vagina is the right temperature to incubate and so you incubate your embryos in this little invos cell container inside your vagina and then 5 days later you come in and we take it out and we take the best embryo and we transfer it and you can do a fresh transfer because you didn't make so many eggs so your hormones weren't so high do people like this procedure there's something that seems like yeah like staying in proximity to the sperm and egg like you're Tak you're taking it home so I love this procedure in some some circumstances and I see it applied often in the wrong case and that that can be frustrating right because it's still not cheap even if it's cheaper than IVF it is still not inexpensive in any means and so patient selection like most things in this field are so important so let's just say if you've had no like if sperm if the sperm's the problem then it's probably not smart to just presume that the sperm and egg will be fine in there right like that might be a case where you really do need help with assisted fertilization or if you have unexplained infertility if we don't know why you haven't been able to get pregnant because everything looks good on paper what if fertilization is the issue and these are circumstances where you pull out an invos cell and there's no embryos and you don't really know where it went wrong was it the fertilization step was it the growth step of the embryos and culture so you do have less data notably I like data you can't do genetic testing and this isn't really a strategy that allows you to freeze embryos for future family growth that being said the young patient who's got great egg quality who might have really bad PCOS or tubal disease it can certainly allow them the opportunity for a child at a lower price point when they still have many reproductive years to finalize their family it also is a lovely option for people who need donor sperm to conceive because the success rates with this are so much higher than an IUI which is what a lot of people use an intra uteran insemination or putting the sperm in the uterus so now we're able to improve this outcome so like our same-sex couples or our single parents by choice if it's a single woman who's trying to become a parent then they need to buy donor sperm and go through the process anyway this often can improve that efficacy through the process pending their age and other factors there was this study that was just really neat there was a lesbian couple and one of them the eggs came out of and the other one incubated the embryos and then the other one had the embryo transfers but it gave both Partners a way to feel a little more involved in the process which I just think is always a really cool way when you have these different options with reproduction seems also um that it's a more of a three-dimensional environment like was imagine that the petri dish is approach um is so two-dimensional compared to the body and all these things having done cell culture before and you know cultured neurons and things of that sort like there's all these concerns about like the concentration of CO2 and the thing or you know you know God forbid if there's a a fluctuation in you you have backup generators and things but in the electrical flow to the incubators that's disruptive whereas the the natural environment of the body even though it fluctuates in temperature it's I mean this has evolved over you know tens of thousands if not you know hundreds of thousands of years to be the process by which embryos are created so there seem so here's where I sort of default in my mind anyway uh to the kind of like oh like it seems more natural you're incubating in the more quote unquote more natural environment but at the same breath why are you having infertility if you're an infertility patient right so if you need donor sperm you maybe don't have infertility or if you have tubal disease you have a very defined reason why we don't think that there's this huge in inflammatory issue in your body or something unknown so again I'll see it applied to people who really are bad candidates for it based on their age or based on their diagnosis and so it's not always better but for the right patient I mean I've had patients have babies that way who otherwise may not be able to so it can it can really open up the doors so that's the most minimal of the minimal stimulation right then we have minimal stimulation because you don't have many eggs so we don't really need that but for the vast majority of people who go through egg freezing or IVF we are really trying to get as many eggs as you potentially have everybody has a different number but whatever you have whatever that anof follicle count is for you is what we're trying to get and that's what these combination of medications is trying to do when the eggs come into the lab if you have egg freezing very important to know before we get into the iie discussion the eggs are stripped of their outer cells which is called the cumulus that's what the sperm has to attach to in order to fertilize in order to freeze the eggs the cumula cells are stripped off the eggs are frozen you have to do ixie so if we're going to lead into this ixie conversation if you're freezing your eggs you're having xie when you fertilize them so I don't want somebody to ever not know that if that is what they are choosing and ixie is you can tell us yes ixie stands for it's icsi or intracytoplasmic sperm injection it is taking a sperm that under the microscope looks normal in shape and moves well and you're pulling it up into a little needle and you're essentially using a little laser on the side of the egg or the zone of palu of the egg and you're injecting that one sperm into that egg cytoplasm and you're picking that sperm on the basis of shape motility you're picking what you think is is the best sperm in the batch obviously yeah you're picking I mean there's going to be one sperm per egg so there's multiple sperm that are chosen but you're picking sperm that look like they have the highest potential my understanding is that there's a range from very low to potentially high but hopefully not high of DNA fragmentation in pretty much every cell to buy like the cell is always repairing its DNA so when visually selecting a sperm uh for E for ixie it's it's based on morphology shape and motility right you can't see the DNA damage inside the head of the sperm or the DNA itself are we are we soon to have a technology where you could actually um like get a die that could label DNA fragmentation and and select um because I feel like so much like when we talk about embryology not to get too far down in the weeds but um like the the methods of selecting eggs and selecting sperm I mean these are the same methods that have been used in embryology for like since the 1930s like oh this one looks good that one looks good and the skilled embryologist can can really develop a a real talent at over time of like knowing what correlated with healthy pregnancy and and an offspring but I do like technology you would think that by now 2023 that someone would have some Dy that you could drop on the sperm and go well like like that one has a lot of DNA fragmentation and that one doesn't know right there should be better ways to choose which sperm there's definitely people are trying things nothing has proven to be helpful so far there's definitely some interest in this because we're starting to get more insight as we have become better at embryo culture getting embryos to grow doing genetic testing on embryos to understand that that male genome kicks in at day three and there's a subset of people who have beautiful fertilization and embryo growth day zero to three and that's all on the egg and then as soon as that male genome kicks in you have this huge drop off in your embryo number and even some of this is in the context of normal sperm parameters right so things aren't really normal though or there's something underlying it and does that mean that every embryo failure on day three post fertilization is of course not but it definitely means that none of the ones before that can be blamed on the sperm and ones after that there's definitely still internal and sperm contributions we don't want to create any um you know couple uh disputes around this um but it can be an an Insight when you're trying to look through somebody's IVF cycle about potentially modifiable factors right can you improve sperm quality by some of these lifestyle measures I mean the debatable thing about a DNA sperm fragmentation so what is that it is not a normal seam in analysis but it is like that as far as it's a sperm sample that is then sent off to be evaluated how much fragmentation or abnormal DNA is in the heads of those sperm the Studies have shown that people who have abnormal DNA sperm fragmentation should do ixie okay that's like the point of the study now ixes become very common place so ixie choosing the sperm to put into the egg originally didn't exist right so what's the alternative conventional fertilization this is having your petri dish your eggs are on it you scorch your sperm you cover it up you put it in the incubator she didn't mean you squirt your sperm she meant she meant the tech the embryologist embryologist squirts the sperm on top clear just to be clear and then pulls it out and the next day sees by which eggs and sperm fertilized well it's really devastating to pull out the dish and have no fertilization and it definitely is a cause of infertility and it can be very hard to know that because fertilization is not challenged on a cellular level until you challenge it so ixie used to be an add-on cost it used to be a separate thing because it was harder to find embryologists who could do it it's so standard that a lot of clinics do it the majority of the time purely because you often don't know all the variables that are impacting fertilization and you're trying to give somebody as many opportunities as possible ixie has you know a lot of those original IVF studies got some of the bad reputation of being the problem with why you might see that 1% rise of birth effects and so ixie took the brunt from a lot of that we really don't see that when we're growing out and we're doing freezing the embryos doing Frozen transfers and I was I mean I do I in almost every patient I'm not going to say in everyone higher probability of success higher probability of success and when you get to this point and so few people have insurance coverage so they're spending their money they're getting second mortgages they're taking out loans if there's one decision that you say well I don't know you could have zero eggs fertiliz or I could have the embryologists pick the best sperm and put them inside the egg and we expect a 75% chance of fertilization that makes sense for the majority of people yeah that that makes sense to me I um because I'm obsessed with data and you know do blood work fairly regularly not not obsessively but fair you know twice a year or so um now I didn't always do that and I actually did one of these um DNA fragment M ation test they're pretty expensive you know they're in the they are more than a cement analysis yeah they're they're in the you know low you know they're sort of $1,200 $1,500 or so at least the one that I did it was very informative like I was relieved to see not abnormal levels of DNA fragmentation but I will say that based on everything you just said it seems like it might be the lower cost option because you know the alternative is to go through repeated cycles of IVF and it's failing and that's certainly much more expensive it is and I mean I will say that there is some current thought by my Urology colleagues right so I am not a urologist but definitely when I have a male who you know needs a sperm extraction maybe he's had a prior vasectomy maybe he's got very low sperm counts and we're going and we're doing a sperm extraction procedure that potentially if you have a patient who has an abnormal DNA sperm fragmentation and even with ixie has this drop off an embryo growth after day three because the sperm are still being made the same way right are they still fragmented that potentially the ejaculatory process could cause some of that fragmentation in certain men and by going in and doing a sperm extraction and not subjecting those sperm to the rigors of ejaculation for lack of a better word could potentially lessen the fragmentation and improve outcomes and I have some patients who we've gone down that road and that has helped them clear to say there's not a study that's not the point of DNA sperm frag it's to try to distinguish if potentially could be a helpful technology but a lot of doctors are offering or doing ixie because we want you to fertilize your eggs when they grow out in culture as we talked about IVF changing the metabolic needs of the embryo you know change throughout the process and so embryo culture has become so much more successful but even in those best case scenarios we're looking at 50% progression so you're going to have loss throughout that culture process no matter what and you said 50% progression so half of the fertilized embryos that make it past a let's say day seven then they're screen for chromosomal abnormalities so then okay then you've got um let's say two or three of those maybe four depending on how many eggs were harvested and your age and then and and age yes thank you and then and then you said of those that are implanted into let's say a woman you're 45 or younger you're looking at about anywhere from 30 to 65% um successful implantation and pregnancy like B healthy baby it's usually a 65% chance of Life birth if it's a genetically tested embryo that that that Aster is the if and that's why you're going to see such varying ibf success rates because if you don't do genetic testing of embryos let's use the 40-year-old who makes four embryos and I send them off for genetic testing I anticipate she has one normal embrio if I do genetic testing which takes it's called PGT pre-implantation genetic testing I am testing for anupy as the traditional testing meaning does it have the right number of chromosomes you can also importantly test for single Gene disorder ERS like cystic fibrosis or Huntington but if we're just doing PGT for anupy I expect an age related proportion of your eggs to be normal or abnormal so at age 40 I expect 20 to 25% normal so I can choose that one and put it in you and have a 65% chance that you have a baby I could not do it I still have the same four that one is in there but if I go and transfer them each independently I'm now going to have closer to a 20 to 30% chance of success right so it is not that I'm changing the embryo by testing it but I'm allowing myself to have higher utility of success higher efficiency putting somebody through less failed transfers which is extremely important and less miscarriages because those also take time and one of the most important things is that you have the opportunity to understand how many potential normal embryos you have in batch Cycles so you could go and do another cycle because I'm 40 I just met my person I really want to have two kids because my sibling is really important in my life yet Naturally by the age I would be for that second child it's going to be very hard to conceive I can go through IVF and batch some embryos so I could save two or three for that second baby that I'm not going to transfer for a few years and that's called embryo Banking and that is changing the ways that people can potentially grow their family at later ages but you don't know that unless you know what's normal or not and it also gives you the chance to go and intervene right now because right now especially if you're older I'm going to have a higher chance of success then if I am four transfers down the road and maybe there was one miscarriage in there too we're suddenly now eight months down the road before I can go do another cycle and get more eggs versus if I found out that none of those were genetically normal the average 40-year-old might have 0 to one if they have average ovarian reserve per cycle so they're going to need multiple Cycles it's not that it's impossible but it's just setting that road of expectation for them but if I don't get any normal embryos I can turn right around and go get more so I am using what's left in that ovarian Vault each month to try to get to that opportunity of a pregnancy for you in a much more efficient way by utilizing genetic testing of these embryos this is where we can put an lips in and sort of like dot dot dot healthy baby right and um maybe in the future uh if we're lucky he'll come back and talk to us about um healthy pregnancy um and uh healthy baby onward um that would be a a fun and important set of discussions I would like to touch on the I don't want to call it the issue but the topic of menopause which I assume is defined as the cessation of menes um but there I'm guessing and I'm guessing it's a constellation of things that happen um and I have a very straightforward question which is is there an acceleration of the onset of menopause are we seeing that nowadays um are there good data on that um should people try to delay menopause what are some of the things that um you talk to patients about in terms of their considerations of ways to ease that transition or maybe even offset that transition with um hormone replacement therapy or other other approaches these are great questions and I do think this is going to be a huge interest in upcoming years as we have learned more about the menopausal transition and the health risks really associated with being hypoestrogenic or having low estrogen menopause if we Define it as ovarian failure so your ovaries now have no eggs or so few eggs that they are refractory to the brain sending out FSH so your brain is sending out all the FSH and LH that it can your ovary is done and not making any estradi or progesterone anymore in this time period what we know is one are we seeing a populationbased increase in earlier menopause there's not been a study to say that observationally in clinically I would say yes because I see so many younger women having low ovarian reserve or having premature ovarian failure or premature ovarian insufficiency which is the more politically correct way of saying it but when we think about what this is is there are modifiable factors right if running out of eggs is a variable and we already said certain things like smoking cigarettes and exposure to toxins and likely chronic inflammation and untreated disease we know that having diabetes those things increase your risk of going into menopause earlier so paying attention to the lifestyle that you have when you're not concerned about your fertility right when you're in your younger years and maybe you're not worried about getting pregnant yet or you're not worried about menopause but those choices that you're making in those time periods at least for women your eggs are going to hold on to them so they have an influence later similarly trying to live a lower inflammatory life and getting sleep and avoiding toxins of which you can is some of the best that you can do to try to naturally prolong when you'll go through menopause with a huge caveat that everybody is truly born with a different number and you do not control that you don't and so you might have been born with a lower number and you can't change that trajectory and you might have cancer and be exposed to chemotherapy which also will deplete your ovarian reserve but so do things like endometriosis especially if it's not being treated in any fashion so that's where we think the birth control pill or progestin exposure or surgery ways to go and decrease the inflammation it's that inflammation associated with endometriosis that's really causing these women to have low ovarian reserve and go into menopause early so not only is that impacting you know fertility and how many eggs you get and how long you have to grow your family but when you go into menopause earlier you have lower life expectancy than people who go into menopause later and that's why you even said it earlier fertility is this variable kind of reflecting longevity and like Health overall so what we do know about menopause is that having that low estrogen whether that happens at the average age of menopause at 51 52 or at an earlier time period it's not good for the brain you know higher risks of dementia increased risks of osteoporosis increased risk of heart disease and stroke and essentially higher risks of death and that's not even to talk about the impact on your life what it can be like to have hot flashes heat and cold insensitivity to have profound vulvar and vaginal atrophy to the point that you no longer want to have intercourse and the changes that it can even have on your gut and your immune system so we as a community you know of doctors especially OBGYNs really recommend hormone replacement therapy in women who are going through menopause and the key here is to initiate it right at the beginning that big Women's Health Initiative study which came out forever ago and showed all this harm with hormone replacement therapy the big issue there was that these people were hypoestrogenic for 10 plus years in one group and then started back on the hor hormones and in that circumstance they'd already been put into this higher risk category and their body had adjusted to not having the hormones and when reexposed they had more Adverse Events but if you are starting on estrogen replacement and it it can be various but honestly the estrogen that we try to replace in this time period much more mimics estradiol we have estradiol pills you can have vaginal inserts you can have patches so it depends on what's going to work for your life but it is not the birth control pill most oftenly and some people it might be that's what they choose but we really are trying to pick an estrogen that is estradi more mimics that natural structure and you can't have unopposed estrogen without reaching the risk of endometrial cancer and so that's why we need to have some progestin so some people will choose a daily progestin some will choose a cyclic progestin and still have periods some will put in an IUD at this time period and then take their daily EST estrogen there's a lot of different options we're trying to find the lowest dose of hormones that relieves your symptoms to provide you relief from some of these lifestyle issues but also helps you not just live longer right we're not just trying to live longer we want to be healthy longer we want to have a better quality of life and certainly Women's Health has for long stopped at this menopausal period and then it's been you're on your own kid and this is when we're really starting to see that intervening at that place especially for women who go into ovarian failure early so those people who have low ovarian reserve who I diagnose I tell all of them hey if you don't freeze your eggs or I never see you again you're going to go through menopause early and when you do I want you to go see somebody I don't want you to just ignore it and suffer with these symptoms which is something that does commonly happen so just making sure that women are empowered to know that these symptoms are what happens it's what happens naturally but by giving their bodies more estrogen and not crazy high doses but just these physiologic levels can really improve both the quality and the longevity of their life is it just the presence of these symptoms that signals the onset of of um of menopause or is is there are there additional cues like for instance if their cycle is getting shorter or longer you certainly will have cycle changes and we consider that the per menopausal period where you're starting to really start seeing a spacing out of your period per so they're no longer coming at that perfect ovulatory pattern when you get into the low ovarian reserve but you're still ovulating regularly they first shorten as we said earlier but then when they start lengthening or you start skipping months that's a real big clue that that things are not going in the right direction and if you find out you have very very low ovarian reserve or you're approaching that per menopause period you're going to start to have more prolonged periods of low estrogen and you'll feel mentally cloudy fatigued more headaches more hot flashes lack of libido those vulvar vaginal symptoms overall more likelihood to have depressed mood and that's a lot that's a lot well Natalie Dr Crawford I want to extend a huge thank you on behalf of myself I've learned so much from you today uh about fertility about Hormone Health for women and you've also touched on a number of important issues about Hormone Health INF fertility for men along the way this has truly been a a mass master class in fertility and hormones and and really touched on topics that are so essential to everybody even if people aren't seeking to conceive or maybe think they don't want to I mean there's so many uh considerations that really extend back to one's teens and if one is beyond their teens like whatever age people are essentially they need to think about these issues and make important decisions and you've really also clarified a lot of the what I think are quite destructive myths that that are prominent out there about for instance egg Harvest and what that to one's fertility so first of all thank you for joining us today I know you're extremely busy you run a clinic you have a you manage a family as well a co-manage a family I I believe but um you know this is the sort of of knowledge that is so challenging to find in one place and yet you also have a number of really spectacular avenues that you deliver information Instagram podcasts books and things of that sort we will refer everyone to to those links um I've learned so much from you over the years really um in following your content and today you've just uh like far exceeded all already high expectations so um thank you ever so much thank you for having me and just thank you for giving a space to talk about women's health and fertility and Reproductive Medicine it means a lot to me and it means a lot to the people who really are trying to do their best every day so we appreciate it we appreciate you and with some luck we'll convit you to come back and talk to us about pregnancy and uh bit more on some of the topics that that we move through quickly thank you thank you thank you for joining me for today's discussion about female hormones and fertility with Dr Natalie Crawford you can find links to her clinical practice as well as to her social media Handles in the show note captions please also check out the link to her excellent podcast entitled as a woman if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a festar review please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests that you'd like me to consider hosting on the hubman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube I do read all the comments not during today's episode but on many previous episodes of The hubman Lab podcast we discuss supplements while supplements aren't necessary for everybody many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like enhancing sleep hormone support and improving Focus if you'd like to learn more about the supplements discussed on the hubman Lab podcast you can go to live momentus spelled o us so live mous.com huberman if you're not already following me on social media it's hubman lab on all social media platforms so that's Instagram Twitter now called X threads Facebook LinkedIn and on all those places I discuss science and science related tools some of which overlaps with the content of the hubman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the content on the hubman Lab podcast so again it's huberman lab on all social media platforms if you haven't already subscribed to our monthly neural network newsletter the neural network newsletter is a completely zeroc cost newsletter that gives you podcast summaries as well as toolkits in the form of brief PDFs we've had toolkits related to optimizing sleep to regulating dopamine deliberate cold exposure Fitness mental health learning and neuroplasticity and much more again it's completely zero cost to sign up you simply go to hubman lab.com go over to the menu tab scroll down to newsletter and by your email I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Natalie Crawford and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 172 ---
Video ID: pkJi9Raxikg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pkJi9Raxikg
Title: Dr. Michael Eisenberg: Improving Male Sexual Health, Function & Fertility
Published: 2023-11-06 13:00:41 UTC
Description:
In this episode, my guest is Dr. Michael Eisenberg, MD, a urologist and professor specializing in male sexual function and fertility at Stanford University. Based on his clinical work and research, he is considered a top world expert on male sexual and reproductive health. We discuss testosterone levels and what really impacts them, testosterone therapy, sperm quality and counts, penile and testicular health and function, pelvic floor and prostate and urinary tract health, erectile function and dysfunction and the various causes and treatments for common male sexual, hormonal and reproductive challenges. We also address post-finasteride syndrome and trends in penile length. This episode is rich in actionable information about men’s sexual and reproductive health, including key tests and at-home evaluations, and the behavioral, nutritional, exercise and prescription-based tools that can support male sexual and reproductive health.

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
ROKA: https://roka.com/huberman 
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman 
Momentous: https://livemomentous.com/huberman 

Dr. Michael Eisenberg
Clinical profile: https://shc.is/3MwGvNL
Academic profile: https://stan.md/3QV7Njz 
Publications: https://stan.md/3QKC1W1
Stanford Male Reproductive Medicine & Surgery Program: https://shc.is/3SAbbBg
X: https://twitter.com/drmeisenberg
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/michael-eisenberg-9230a429 

Articles
Evidence for decreasing quality of semen during past 50 years: https://bit.ly/465P8Wm
Temporal trends in sperm count: a systematic review and meta-regression analysis of samples collected globally in the 20th and 21st centuries: https://bit.ly/3FMzlB9
Geographic differences in semen quality of fertile U.S. males: https://bit.ly/463SxoF
Self-rated health and semen quality among 3,457 young Danish men: https://bit.ly/461q4j6
Effect of Radiation Emitted by Wireless Devices on Male Reproductive Hormones: A Systematic Review: https://bit.ly/46XON9C
The influence of direct mobile phone radiation on sperm quality: https://bit.ly/3tUdG7i
Cannabis and Male Fertility: A Systematic Review: https://bit.ly/46QubQt
Association of paternal age with perinatal outcomes between 2007 and 2016 in the United States: population based cohort study: https://bit.ly/3QiJ4UE
Worldwide Temporal Trends in Penile Length: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis: https://bit.ly/40s7UGi

Other Resources
Testosterone trends: https://www.urologytimes.com/view/testosterone-levels-show-steady-decrease-among-young-us-men 

Huberman Lab Episodes Mentioned
The Science of How to Optimize Testosterone & Estrogen:  https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/the-science-of-how-to-optimize-testosterone-and-estrogen 

The Science of Healthy Hair, Hair Loss and How to Regrow Hair:  https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/the-science-of-healthy-hair-hair-loss-and-how-to-regrow-hair 

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Michael Eisenberg
00:01:49 Sponsors: ROKA & Eight Sleep
00:04:20 Sperm Quality, Geographic & Environmental Factors 
00:12:00 Fertility & Sperm Quality; Testosterone, Cell Phones & Heat
00:19:26 Testosterone, Age, Obesity
00:26:49 Tool: Optimize Sperm Quality, Exogenous Testosterone, hCG
00:35:26 Sponsor: AG1
00:36:57 Tool: Lifestyle Factors & Sperm Quality, Alcohol
00:43:27 Sperm Quality, Recreational & Over-the-Counter Drugs, Cannabis
00:46:56 High-Impact Sports, Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI), Pituitary & Testosterone
00:49:55 Bicycling, Numbness & Sexual Dysfunction; Walking & Testosterone
00:55:39 Exogenous Testosterone Therapy & Cancer
00:58:39 Sponsor: LMNT
00:59:57 Sexual & Urinary Health, Nighttime Urination
01:03:12 Sleep & Semen Quality; Overall Health
01:09:19 Tool: Sperm Analysis & Overall Health; Sperm Banking
01:13:21 Paternal Age & Puberty Trends; Older Fathers & Child Health Risk
01:26:42 Tool: Prostate Health, Urination; Tadalafil (Cialis)
01:33:02 Urinary Tract Infections (UTIs); Erectile Dysfunction Causes
01:38:21 Blood Flow & Erectile Dysfunction, Medication; Cardiovascular Health
01:44:30 Mechanical Erectile Dysfunction Treatments; Peptides; Delayed Ejaculation
01:52:36 Pelvic Floor Health, Urology & Physical Therapy; Split-Stream Urination
01:59:03 Penile Length & Trends; Dihydrotestosterone (DHT), Puberty
02:09:01 Hair Loss, Dutasteride, Finasteride & Sexual Health; Post-Finasteride Syndrome
02:16:11 Clomiphene, Testosterone & Estrogen Signaling
02:19:31 Follicle-Stimulating Hormone (FSH) Therapy; Prolactin, Estrogen
02:24:15 Varicocele; Peyronie’s Disease
02:27:26 Testis & Cancer Risk; Insurance, Blood Profiles & Semen Analysis
02:35:03 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, YouTube Feedback, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

#HubermanLab #Science #MaleFertility

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine my guest today is Dr Michael Eisenberg Dr Michael Eisenberg is a medical doctor specializing in urology and an expert in male sexual function and fertility he is both a clinician who sees patients as well as a research scientist having published over 300 peer-reviewed articles on male sexual function Urology and fertility and he is considered one of the world's foremost experts in male sexual health today we discuss a broad range of topics important to all men including erectile dysfunction and function we also discuss prostate health and urinary Health we discuss fertility and sperm count we discuss even topics seemingly esoteric such as why penile lengths are actually increasing over time while sperm count seem to be decreasing today you'll also learn some very interesting surprises such as the fact that a very very small percentage of erectile dysfunction actually stems from hormone dysfunction rather the vast majority of erectile dysfunction stems from issues that are either vascular that is related to blood flow or neural and today you'll learn about a large variety of treatments for erectile dysfunction Dr Eisenberg also dispels a lot of common myths that you hear out there both on the internet and in popular culture that relate to male sexual health and function by the end of today's episode I assure you that you will have a thorough understanding of what male sexual health is how it relates to other aspects of health and how to think about treating maintaining and improving all aspects of male sexual health fertility and function before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools TOS to the general public in keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is Roa Roa makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality the company was founded by two All-American swimmers from Stanford and everything about Roa eyeglasses and sunglasses were designed with performance in mind I've spent a lifetime working on the biology of the visual system and I can tell you that your visual system has to contend with an enormous number of challenges in order for you to be able to see clearly Roa understands this and as design I glasses both for sport and for wearing in casual settings or to work or to dinner that always allow you to see with Crystal Clarity their eyeg glasses are extremely lightweight and they won't slip off your face even if you get sweaty I wear Roa sunglasses when I'm driving into direct sunlight or when it's particularly bright during the middle of the day if you'd like to try Roa eyeglasses or sunglasses go to Roa that's r.com and enter the code huberman to save 20% off your first order again that's Roa r.com and enter the code huberman at checkout today's episode is also brought To Us by eight sleep eight sleep makes Smart mattress covers with cooling Heating and sleep tracking capacity I've spoken many times before in this podcast about the fact that getting a great night's sleep really is the foundation of mental health physical health and performance one of the key things to getting a great night's sleep is to make sure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct and that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep your body temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3° and in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized your body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3° with eight sleep you can program the temperature of your sleeping environment in the beginning middle and end of your night it has a number of other features like tracking the amount of rapid eye movement and slow wave sleep that you get things that are essential to really dialing in the perfect night sleep for you I've been sleeping on an eight Sleep mattress cover for well over two years now and it has greatly improved my sleep I fall asleep far more quickly I wake up far less often in the middle of the night and I wake up feeling far more refreshed than I ever did prior to using an eights Sleep mattress cover if you'd like to try eightsleep you can go to 8sleep.com huberman to save $150 off their pod 3 cover eight sleep currently ships to the USA Canada UK select countries in the EU and Australia again that's 8sleep.com huberman and now for my discussion with Dr Michael Eisenberg Dr Eisenberg welcome thank you good to be here I've been looking forward to talking to you for a long time because these days we hear a lot about the diminishing quality of sperm which in some way seems to be tacked to the conversation about diminishing quality of environment people intelligence you know there's a lot woven into this statement that sperm quality is declining and some of it I think people assume is related to environmental changes some of it I think people assume it are related to changes in Behavior so maybe less exercise less sunlight who knows hopefully you'll tell us what's really going on but the first question I have is is sperm quality actually declining and regardless what is sperm quality yeah great question so I think it's very controversial I think as your question alludes to so I think we'll start by just talking about what sperm quality is and why it's important so for reproduction as you've covered on the podcast before a man makes semen uh and that has sperm in it and so when we're talking clinically about a semen analysis there's a few things we look at we look at the amount of ejaculate semen that comes out we look at the sperm how many there are we look at their motility or Movement we look at their morphology or shape there's some more advanced testing that's done in rare cases looking at like fragmentation of DNA for example or there's some newer tests looking at epigenetic profiles of sperm uh but essentially these are all markers or fertility so fertility in itself is a team sport right so it's hard to you know make label a man as fertile or not fertile without knowing about his partner um but nevertheless based on different these different parameters we try and quantify How likely a man is to be able to achieve a pregnancy so the World Health Organization every decade or so looks over the existing literature and defines these different cut points of what's normal or what's subfertile uh for those levels so that's sort of the backdrop of what Seaman is and how you know these these tests are done or you know what these tests represent now the question of whether they've declined over time um has been you know a question for a number of years there was a landmark paper in the early 90s by Carlson and a group in Denmark that showed this temporal decline you know over the last 50 years from that time point and so what the investigators had done is looked over the literature for studies that reported semen quality around the world and noted that you know the quality in the earliest studies like in kind of the mid uh 20th century were here and then over time they had sort of declined the more recent studies um now that study was very controversial there was questions about waiting from different studies putting because you can imagine these there's not a lot of early studies so putting a lot more importance on those rather than some of the later ones um and so since then there's been many other studies that have that have come out in time and even today it remains very controversial I think you know if I were to say that I believe there's a decline some of my colleagues and friends would be very upset with me if I say I don't believe it some of my colleagues and friends would be very upset with me so I would say that you know my opinion really varies based on Whose paper I've read and I there's some very convincing you know studies uh on each side of it you know there most recently just in the last year or so there was a meta analysis of you know tens of thousands of men where they looked at again a host of these studies over the last uh number of decades all around the globe so prior studies to really just focused on the Western Hemisphere Western countries CU there was more data from that but more recently we've gotten a lot of data from Africa from Asian countries as well uh and those also support this decline um so you know one of the counterarguments to why we're seeing that is just sort of an evolution of techniques over time um so that's one of the the sort of the popular um questions about whether there's really a true decline um you know I think as you're alluding to why there would be a is also you know unknown and but you've sort of labeled you know perfectly the kind of most common hypotheses so whether there's some environmental exposures right a lot of things have changed over the last 50 years and I think you know chemical exposure certainly one of those and there have been some fairly convincing you know pre-clinical studies so you know mostly done in animals uh that show that like exposure to different chemicals phalates um or BPA other things may actually harm you know reproductive function for men and for women as well uh and so it may be that you know these chemicals you know that are that we're being exposed to as kids and adults or even probably um more sinisterly when we're um you know kind of developing in utero that may be kind of the most harmful exposure um but there's also been you know an obesity epidemic as well and there's a strong link between a men man's reproductive function um and body weight and so that's also um thought to play a role in some of this too um so I think there are convincing studies but the other I guess aspect to this is that there's variations in SE quality around the country and around the world there's Geographic variation and so that's also sort of an unknown um uh explanation uh you know there could be different sort of genetic you know compositions of men and so there's different reproductive potential in that Source there could be different environmental exposures diet exercise lifestyle and there's a famous study um done a number of years ago where they looked at se in equality among fathers so these are men that had achieved a pregnancy and at the first you know prenatal visit they had um the fathers give a seaman sample and so this was done four centers around the country I think it one in California there was um think one in the midwest uh there was one in New York so they basically found that steam in quality was sort of highest in the urban centers in New York tended to be the highest numbers where it was was you know lower in the Midwest and so the hypothesis was potentially because it was a more rural setting maybe there was pesticide exposure and that had led to these lower numbers but you know another equally plausible explanation may be that you know they different sort of a different population and maybe you know that that could explain these differences so I think it's it's you know very important um and I think you know one of the sort of lacking things in this is there's not really longitudinal data one of the greatest things would be if we just started tracking um seen quality around the country just like we do obesity like you know n Hayes cdc's uh survey of Health in in the us if we added semen quality onto that that way you could really see you know how it varries around the country and you know sort of compare like to like to see over time if there's really this progression you know one of the only studies to do that in Denmark um that started around you know around 2000 and tracked Sean quality among um you know volunteers that came in when they were conscripted for military service in Denmark they were offered the opportunity to participate in this study um and so some men did and what they found is actually that seam quality was fairly uniform over about 20 years where they had data but sort of another very interesting part of that study is that only about a quarter of those men had normal seam quality um so sort of very concerning you know it was I guess reassuring that it wasn't further declining but very concerning that only a quarter of Danish men had you know normal Seamon quality and they're one of the I think thought leaders in this field um just because sort of a reproductive crisis there you mentioned that some of this apparent decline in seaming quality might be related to the fact that the tools to measure seaming quality are getting better and better and that would make sense if for instance one is just looking at total volume morphology which means shape I should have clarified that um how many forwardly motile sperm there are and then also adding in you know a very sensitive measure such as um DNA fragmentation you know essentially as the instruments get finer and finer you discover more and more details and if you are um rating quality along a number of different dimensions then it would make sense that those would tear out into different levels so if one were to Simply ask for couples who want to get pregnant and assuming that egg quality is not the issue what percentage of failures to achieve successful pregnancy are the consequence of deficient sperm deficient in any way and is that number increasing over time yeah so I think that's really key I think when couples think about fertility usually it's thought of as a female problem um and I think there's just historic reasons for that you know if you look at data in the US when couples do seek care for fertility the man has bypassed probably a third of the time even though when you look at the reasons for infertility man contributes probably half of the time to infertility so I think there's a half half yeah so I think there's a huge need just to understand and evaluate the man and one of the reasons for this I think is that um you know one of the main treatments for infertility in the US is IVF which is very powerful I think one of the you know greatest marvels of medicine in probably the last you know quarter century is our ability to mix a sperm and egg in a dish and create a life it's really remarkable but because it now takes just a single sperm you know through something called inid plasmic sperm injection where you can inject one egg or one sperm into an egg you know the bar has gone down dramatically you know if a couple's just trying without you know any assistance probably need 20 to 40 million moving sperm but now with you know these remarkable techniques you just need one sperm um and so because of that you know I think a lot of our Innovation and research on male fertility has probably gone to the Wayside just because clinically you know we just need you know a few dozen sperm for most couples what about testosterone levels are those also declining we hear this um and when I look at the literature I can find evidence for that but the question is also whether or not the amount of decline in testosterone levels is significant in a way that impacts let's say fertility but also um Vitality in other ways energy mood um Sexual Health Etc U what's the story with testosterone levels are they indeed declining on average across the male population in the US and elsewhere I think there is pretty convincing evidence that that is happening and I think the reason for that again is probably not certain but you know there have been you know some pretty nicely designed cohort studies where theyve recruited you know men in the the 2000s the 90s the 80s and you can see that depending on when these men are recruited just you know matching age for age these testosterone levels tend to be lower um and then en haanes which is again this sort of longitudinal study run by the CDC um that has also sh looking at testosterone levels over you know decades the testosterone levels have declined over time um so there you know chemical exposure is one possible explanation again either in adult or adolescent life or in utero um but obesity I think is also sort of a convincing explanation is we're more sedentary um you know we get bigger that's one of the places that testosterone can decline I think there's different sort of explanations for that um you know as testosterone produced it's aromatized in U peripheral tissue you know in fat tissue fat has a lot of this aromatase so that converts testosterone to estrogen so it necessarily you know lowers the testosterone level that's circulating in our body um also just insulating the the testicles our thighs get bigger insulating the testes can also sometimes lower the efficiency of production a little bit too because of heat effects because of heat effects yeah I was going to ask about this later but I'll ask about it now since we're talking about heat effects and um sperm and testosterone um The Heat Of course being not good for um sperm health and testosterone which is I've read a metaanalysis I don't know um how high quality it is but um that explained that there is some evidence for um either heat effects or possibly non-heat related effects of cell phone you know smartphone in the pocket impairing sperm Health maybe even testosterone levels now you hear this more often kind of bioh hacky um I don't know uh circles um which you know I'm not a fan of the word biohacking um ites it's not clear what it means but it it it sounds like it means something about taking a shortcut using one thing for a purpose it wasn't intended but you know it also makes sense to me that a smartphone could generate some heat um some radiation that might impair um testicular function and therefore impair sperm quality and or testosterone levels but is there any real solid data that carrying your cell phone in your pocket let's assume on that the cell phone is on is bad for sperm health or testosterone levels yeah so um I think there's not convincing evidence that it's going to help um testosterone levels I think that you know it's Gonna Hurt testosterone it's not going to hurt yeah so I should you know make clear that I think that in terms of production and heat effects you know sperm production is much more sensitive than testosterone production um but there have been some studies looking at cell phone exposure because again you're getting this whether it's heat whether it's sort of the you know radio frequency you know waves coming in I think you could posit sort of different explanations of why that may be harmful so there have been some studies that you know looked early on you know men that used cell phones more or less they had lower semen quality if they used it more but you can also imagine there's huge differences in men that do and do not use cell phones so you know it's it's it's a hard experiment to design but there have been some studies uh doing this in vitro so in the laboratory so taking you know sperm in a cup basically and putting a cell phone next to it or not next to it to try and see if that played a role there have been studies done where they um sort of normalized the the heat you know they kind of put it on um sort of a special stage so that it's not heat necessarily but maybe it's RF exposure so those studies I think don't show sort of a a clinically meaningful change but there have been some studies that say that maybe DNA fragmentation of sperm can go up a little bit if there's close proximity uh to a cell phone um so I think you know when patients ask me that which is a common question I get in clinic obviously patients are coming in they want to do you know whatever they can um to try and improve their chances um so I think generally I think the data is not convincing um but you know if it's easy enough certainly to be aware of it you know I think putting a laptop on a desk rather than in your lap I think for heat exposure is probably the biggest thing that we want to minimize about a year and a half ago I did an episode about about testosterone and estrogen where it's manufactured in the male and female body Etc and I found a very interesting graph in a uh textbook on U behavioral Endocrinology by a guy named Randy Nelson who I happen to know through the field of Behavioral Endocrinology as it's typically studied in animals so most of that book centers on animal studies but there's a a fraction of the studies that Center on human uh data and there was a very interesting graph that showed testosterone levels as a function of age in na s um and as one might expect testosterone levels were on average much higher in late teens early 20s 30s and there was a progressive decline but what was remarkable to me about that graph is that even when exploring the um Scatter Plots because they showed individual points they didn't just show the averages of testosterone levels in men in their 50s 60s 7s 80s even 90s there were these outliers these guys who had testost levels that were on par with uh testosterone levels of men in their 30s but these guys were in their 50s 60s 7s 80s even 90s so do you observe this clinically Do You observe that um men are coming in you know a who are older than 40 and have testosterone levels and presumably free testosterone levels as well um that are still very high you know and the reason I asked is that I think we've all been told and we presume that testosterone levels decline with age and one would expect some outliers and of of course we don't know whether or not those guys in their 90s who have the testosterone levels of that match the averages of men in their 30s didn't have even greater testosterone levels in their 30s but given that they were ceilinged out around 900 nanograms per deciliter you know toward the highend normal depending on the scale um in already at age 90 it's kind of hard to imagine that earlier they're walking around with you know 2,000 nanogram per deser testosterone so do you see this are there some is there just a lot of natural variation in testosterone levels of men walk into the clinic at any age and of course what is special about these individuals that are you know maintaining high normal testosterone levels into their uh later years yeah that's a great question I think this is such a common question anytime we talk about testosterone I think anytime we talk about most sort of uh clinical tests that we do you know what is average what is normal um so we do see great variation I mean I think just like you're saying I usually let everybody know that you know usually testosterone Peaks you know kind of early 20s and it tends to go down probably 1% a year forever uh but there are people that have very you know very very high levels I you know just mirroring you know that graph that you describe I certainly have patients you know we screen for testosterone levels you know when patients come in with complaints or we're worried about that low energy level you know low liido some of the symptoms of low testosterone sexual dysfunction and you know to my surprise sometimes these men you know I've seen 80-year-olds that certainly have the highest test stost level I'll see you know for 6 months um you know why that is I think is not certain maybe it has to do with you know I think with everything there's probably sort of a bell-shaped curve and everybody's a little bit different um but Androgen sensitivity you know sensitivity of the receptor you know they make it more efficiently but I have not really noticed again because at least in clinical practice you know when patients come in they come in with a complaint and so even men you know with very high levels they may have some of the same dysfunction men with low levels so I think with low levels you can try and treat that and that may be the solution but for men with you know these what we would consider high levels um you know there may be other issues going on let me frame the question I was going to ask a little bit differently when someone comes into your clinic and you measure their testosterone levels as you mentioned they're likely coming in because they have some issue prostate issue sexual function issue Etc but you do get a read on their you know so crude morol of their body right so you could visibly determine whether or not they're likely to be obese or not um regardless of age so earlier you mentioned obesity as a risk factor for lowering testosterone and sperm quality you mentioned that fat aromatizes testosterone into estrogen so that's at least one mechanism by which that could happen but if you were to just step back and say okay if somebody who walks into my clinic tends to be um let's say healthier looking you know not obese let's just put the cut off at what you would presume is obese um is there a higher probability that their testosterone levels are going to be within normal range conversely when somebody walks in and their obese do you fully expect their testosterone levels to be subnormal um or are you sometimes seeing obese people walking in with you know high testosterone um and the reason I'm asking this is not to create confusion is that I think that everybody out there who's thinking about sperm quality and testosterone levels and this uh apparent decline trying to figure out you know okay what can we do in order to maintain the health metrics that are going to of course increase fertility but for those that don't want to have kids or already have kids are going to at least maintain or improve Vitality is obesity really the thing to avoid so is there a not one for one but is there a tight correlation between obesity and testosterone levels I would say that you cannot predict I think that sort of would be the take-home and so I think that you know more information is always better you know when I see patients in clinic um you know some patients are walking around you know with yeah everything is totally normal they're very healthy all the numbers come in at the normal range but sometimes when men you know look totally normal they talked about taking care of their life they exercise you know five seven days a week their testosterone levels can be very low so even despite you know having what we would consider should really give them you know symptoms um they're able to compensate you know maybe they've lived their whole life in that they don't know what normal is now we get them you know to sort of normal levels a lot of times they feel better again because they have no idea how they should feel um but I think that that's just sort of important that everybody you know should be screened I think that you know testosterone semen quality they have been shown to even be barometers of Health um so you know men with lower testosterone levels of higher risk of you know heart disease diabetes mortality the same studies exist for semen quality as well um and you know again they may have sort of a similar Rel relationship and explanation why that may be but I think it's hard to just predict you know based on appearance what you know testosterone will be what seam quality be what testicular function will be without actually getting some objective data and actually if you look at the trend of test of seman quality decline over time kind of getting back to some of those earlier points you're making if you were to Overlay that on the known association between obesity um its effects on SE quality that actually doesn't explain the whole decline because the you the purported decline in seam quality is about 50% but if you just if you were to say well what would we expect if you know we look at you know because we were able to track exactly how much fatter we are now than we used to be that actually only explains about a 10% decline so I think there is you know to your point something more um and it is not something that you can just identify by eye what are the dos and don'ts as it relates to I don't want to use the word optimizing it's gotten me into trouble before because word optimize or optimal suggest that there's an perfect number that one should all attain if possible but in reality um optimal is a day-to-day thing um at least but what should people avoid in order to get their sperm quality as high as possible their testosterone level again here I have to be careful I don't want to say as high as possible because some people might not want excessive Androgen um but at the high end of normal perhaps would be the ideal for many people what should people do what should they avoid and here I'm setting aside any prescription clinical treatments that such as testosterone injections or things like uh chonic gatr human coron and genotropin things we can talk about a little bit later but what should every male be doing in order to optimize these Health parameters yeah so I think that there are some risk factors that we do like we'll start with steam and quality so we talked about heat I think that's a big one so like hot tub on us trying and avoid those some you know light data on seat warmers anytime you know we kind of get this external heat source to the scrotum you know the testicles are outside the body because they need to be a little cooler so anything that warms them up can certainly be a problem could I just briefly interrupt there um to ask we've done episodes on sauna and some of the health benefits of sauna um is it sufficient for somebody to bring in a cold pack to the sauna and put that in their groin I actually have suggested that that's actually what I do when I go into the sauna um and I have suggested this on podcasts um not just for people who are trying to conceive because it seems like heat as you mentioned is bad for sperm not quite as bad for testosterone levels but is it also true that heating the testicle too much is generally bad for endocrine function in males and therefore would if one is going to go into a hot sauna for 20 minutes or more to essentially cool the the scrotal area yeah I mean I think the spermatogenesis or sperm production is certainly a lot more sensitive you know whether you can sort of thwart the effects of external heat with a cooling pack I think it makes sense there are studies that have looked at different ways to cool the scrotum and have compared you know semen quality before and after and there's some data that may help um it just depends how long you're going to spend in the sauna and how cold you know that pack is going to remain so ice pack and in the sauna for 20 to 45 minutes and is the ice pack still cold afterwards yeah yeah they actually sell and by the way have no relationship to any of these companies but they actually sell cold packs that are designed to be worn in your short so if you go to a you know I'll go to a Russian Bia every once in a while now I guess I'm outing myself yes I have a yes I have a cold pack in my shorts when I go to the Russian B um but um but they have a a sort of an insulation so that you're the cold the very cold surface is cold enough but it's not right up in contact with the scrotal skin because that could get um I want to make a bad joke and say it could get sticky uh that situation you you don't want it get being so cold that it actually would stick to the skin and then it could potentially damage the skin when you try to remove the cold pack so it has a thin insulating layer um and uh yeah that's essentially what it is yeah I mean frostbite to the scrotum is not theoretical it could certainly happen so you do want to be careful so I mean in theory that should be that should be adequate to sort of you know to decrease the risk of that particular effect um you know I keep coming back to health how important that is to maintain um you know sperm production because I think these two are very linked you know there have been studies that show that men with more com morid conditions so obesity hypertension hyper lipidemia as these sort of Stack Up we see a decline in testicular function so lower testosterone levels and lower sperm quality so I think you know taking ownership of your your health I think is important as well um you know a lot of times um fertility tends to be one of the first touch points that some men have with Healthcare you know because generally what brings men to the doctor it's usually pain or you know kind of a problem um so you know if men are in their 20s and 30s getting ready to start a family or 40s in some cases sometimes they haven't you know seen a primary care doctor so some of these things some of this relationship has not been established yet so I think you know thinking about ways to start that I think would be important too um and then I know you don't want to talk about testosterone but testosterone is actually a fairly common problem that we see in fertility clinics um I would say that you estimates say maybe about one in 20 infertile men are that way because of testosterone so I I think when you know people get testosterone from different places and hopefully you know whatever prietor you're getting it from tells you that one of the side effects of this um is lower sperm production it's actually been tested as a contraceptive and you know with some other agents it can actually be fairly effective so we just want to make sure that you know if men are starting testosterone they're doing it for the right reasons and they're doing it safely I think you're talking about testosterone replacement therapy although as we were talking about before we started recording I I am really on a push now to rename what people call trt testosterone replacement therapy because indeed some people have low testosterone and need it replaced the r and trt but I think what you're referring to if I'm not mistaken is that there are probably Millions yeah of young men and older men taking exogenous testosterone injections creams pills pellets you know any number nasal sprays now you know any number of different routes of delivery of exogenous um testo tone and that um dramatically reduces one's endogenous testosterone production and dramatically reduces one's sperm count and maybe even quality we'll maybe talk about this a little bit later but maybe even can there there's I've been told that it can perhaps introduce a DNA fragmentation uh within the remaining viable sperm as well so do I have that Craig you're saying that that you see one in 120 men have issues with fertility because they are taking testosterone right so they testosterone levels presumably are going to be highend normal or more but they are doing presumably not testosterone replacement therapy but they're doing what I call testosterone augmentation therapy meaning they were somewhere in the 300 to 900 nanograms per deciliter range but decided to start taking testosterone anyway and then their their sperm count essentially diminishes to nil or close to it in some cases yeah so I mean I think there's various reasons you would take testosterone I think you know some people have been treated you know years ago and so they do need to replace testosterone you know um but some people do it for augmentation I just usually say testosterone therapy just so it you kill the R I like that that's better than the t a which doesn't S very good okay just testosterone therapy yeah okay but if you had you know for example we take 100 of my infertile patients that come in to see me in clinic at least five of those men will be infertile because they're on testosterone therapy and some of them do you know have that suspicion they say you know I'm level with you this is why my levels are probably low but a lot of men were not told that you know when they started therapy so I think certainly for Reproductive age men that's in a very important conversation to have um because there can be some other you know ways that we kind of maintain sperm production I think sperm cry preservation is a good option for these men as well um or there may be other therapies they can think about just because of reproductive toxicity what about um HCG human chonic gonadotrope and I hear about a lot of people who go on testosterone therapy who take HCG every other day or so um typically the dosages that I hear about because people write to me about this stuff all the time really it's one of the most commonly asked questions um I get many questions about many topics but I would say a full 10 to 20% of them are about um penises or testosterone um those is perfect then right exactly um so a number of those um guys who are taking test testosterone will be prescribed HCG to um stimulate sperm production um endogenous sperm production to maintain um healthy sperm presumably because they either want to conceive or are intending to conceive in the future is that the best line of treatment for maintaining fertility while people are taking testosterone therapy yeah that's one of the therapies that we use and I think it can work well you know just a low dose um usually again for those that that know 500 to 1,000 units every other day is usually adequate as we all know quality nutrition influences of course our physical health but also our mental health and our cognitive functioning our memory our ability to learn new things and to focus and we know that one of the most important features of highquality nutrition is making sure that we get enough vitamins and minerals from high quality unprocessed or minimally processed sources as well as enough probiotics and prebiotics and fiber to support basically all the cellular functions in our body including the gut microbiome now I like most everybody try to get optimal nutrition from Whole Foods ideally mostly from minimally processed or nonprocessed Foods however one of the challenges that I and so many other people face is getting enough servings of high quality fruits and vegetables per day as well as fiber and probiotics that often accompany those fruits and vegetables that's why way back in 2012 long before I ever had a podcast I started drinking ag1 and so I'm delighted that ag1 is sponsoring the huberman Lab podcast the reason I started taking ag1 and the reason I still drink ag1 once or twice a day is that it provides all of my foundational nutritional needs that is it provides insurance that I get the proper amounts of those vitamins minerals probiotics and fiber to ensure optimal mental health physical health and performance if you'd like to try ag1 you can go to drink a1.com huberman to claim a special offer they're giving away five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 again that's drink a1.com huberman to claim that special offer so if somebody is not taking testosterone exogenously they gotten their um body fat level down to a point where they're not considered obese so they're hopefully doing some cardiovascular exercise each week maybe doing some sport or some resistance training too um uh with the intention of maintaining all around good health Stave off you know cerebrovascular cardiovascular issues what are some of the other don'ts um I'm going to assume that smoking cigarettes or vaping cigarettes is Bad are there any studies that have looked specifically at vaping and sperm quality or testosterone levels um and is there any evidence that uh smoking cigarettes is good for testosterone levels or sperm production because I'm guessing the answer is no I feel like nowadays we just say don't smoke um but the data are the data who knows maybe nicotine can help sperm I have no idea right uh it's possible I don't think we have the data on that yet but yeah I mean I think like to your point I think lifestyle factors are certainly a big one and you know some of these you know potentially um you know kind of unhealthy habits so smoking is certainly something you should not do there have been you know lots of studies that do link that to you know lower quality again all the different measures that we look at um also looking at fertility these men tend to have a longer time to get pregnant um alcohol I think is another very common question get asked as well and I think for that there's you know I think less of a strong Association that we've seen so there um you know there have been some studies that show that very high levels of alcohol and I guess that's sort of subjective what some would consider are higher or not but you know when you get above maybe 20 drinks a week there have been some effects but usually that's a lot of drinking I would think that's a lot yeah but some people don't but yeah I did an episode on alcohol I think anything more than two I know people are gonna um you know bulk at this but you know I think any more than two drinks per week is where you start to see some negative effects on some health parameters but you know I'm I'm not a tea Toler so yeah yeah um but when you get to this 20 drink that's when we started to see some effects on cement quality but the you know the thing about that is that usually if these men are drinking 20 they're doing other things too smoking there can be other drug use as well so it's hard to tease that out but in general that's you know I think certainly anything in moderation is probably you know is probably better and so that's how I counsel patients I think again it's very rare that I see men that are at that level but I certainly let them know when I do um there's some new data coming out of that we've started to work on looking at if there are different sensitivities to alcohol so you know some East Asians have a mutation that leads to Flushing um and so that may put those men at higher risk when they mix alcohol we may see some you know slightly lower uh sperm parameters you mean skin flushing because they don't make alcohol dehydrogen is idea yeah yeah um and is it I've heard about that in Asian cultures is there um in Asian population excuse me but is there any evidence that other populations might have slight variance on alcohol dehydrogenase that perhaps maybe they don't lack it Al together but they have I don't know um they're hypomorphs for whatever Gene makes alcohol dehydrogenase and therefore they don't metabolize it as well and therefore the toxic form of alcohol is active in their system longer is there any evidence for that no I think you're exactly right I mean I think the one that we think about is East Asian cultures where it can be you know depending on you know the region like um Chinese Taiwanese probably about 40 to 50% of the population has you know mutation in the alh2 gene but other populations um in people of African ancestry there's a rate of mutation I think not going to remember the exact percentage but I think a few percentage points is some um individual with Hispanic ancestry ashkanazi Jewish ancestry so in this particular Gene there's a mutation not the same one that East Asians have but you know again I think it gets to why mutation you know where we see sort of negative effects would persist and the hypothesis that you know Millennia ago po potentially it you know gave some sort of benefit for maybe an infectious disease or something similar to cystic fibrosis why you know again this mutation would persist in our population if there's not you know you know some sort of Advantage uh to those carrying it um but we do see another you know other men as well so I think if you know it's a simple question do you flush if you flush then maybe alcohol may have you know more of a a harm than than someone else and then you know get S of getting along the lines I think drug use is also something that we should you know we do counsel patients about because that can also negatively affect SE quality do you think it's fair to say that okay moderation is best but if somebody had the option to either not drink or drink in moderation that they should not drink would that be even better is there any evidence for that I mean it seems like nowadays we take the stance that um not smoking at all is better than smoking a little bit actually when I was a postto at Stanford from 2005 yes 2005 to uh end of 2010 um you could still smoke on the Stanford campus I'm not a smoker but there was this collection of I have to be careful what I say here there was a particular group on campus of postdocs and graduate students that would um you know that would colonize this little area outside the hospital and smoke because that's where you could smoke that was eventually um eliminated as a possibility you can't smoke on Sanford campus as far as I know but they would smoke right outside the hospital actually a lot of the hospital workers would you know take a cigarette on their break this is very common exactly yeah and and this common all over the country right this isn't unique to Stanford but nowadays you just don't see that um because it's not allowed um and we here don't smoke it's terrible for XYZ and everything every other letter of the alphabet with alcohol um we tend to hear that if you're going to drink drink in moderation um it's not clear exactly what number that is but is it possible that zero alcohol is better for sperm and endocrine Health than any alcohol or is that not not a fair assumption I mean I think that's a good question I think you know the your point about tobacco is an excellent one because I think any smoking is bad um but alcohol I think we don't have that data for yet and so I think it's it's harder to it's harder for me to make that recommendation to patients especially because you know people do it for different reasons um and if it's not necessarily going to help them you know it'll harm them in social situations or other things um yeah I usually just I usually give the the moderation one unless again for the the very high drinkers I definitely talk about that um you mentioned other drug use um I'm going to assume that uh unless prescribed for sort of postsurgical pain or something like that that benzodiazapines heroin opioids of any kind um are just bad for sperm and testosterone I think we could probably make that a short discussion right yeah you know I can't imagine any of that would be good um for Reproductive Health yeah that's true I mean there's again you'd imagine or may maybe not but there's not a lot of data on it um it'd be difficult to enroll or maybe easy to enroll but a lot of those Studies have not been done um but there's limited ones of you know people in rehab uh where they have shown you know these associations with you know addicts or users and lower quality so um yeah that's how we talk to patients what about cannabis I did an episode of this podcast about cannabis and I did highlight some of the medical applications of cannabis I also highlighted that very high THC cannabis um May predispose especially young men s to later psychotic episodes there are more and more data coming out about that all the time I um got a lot of flak for for saying that but that's my take on the data um and um I know a lot of people use cannabis uh recreationally um and in a kind of pseudo therapeutic way I say pseudo is the relationship between cannabis use and testosterone and sperm production or I should say sperm quality excuse me yeah so this is also a very common question um again with this wave of legalization across the country I think more and more men and women are exposed to it um so again there's data that the more men are exposed to it it can lead to some harm in terms of sperm morphology and sperm numbers as well um you know one of the sort of landmarks that IES was about 1,200 men and it found that men that use cannabis daily had significantly lower concentration motility morphology compared to those that didn't use it um so I think that's generally how men are counseled but there's also you know other data that shows really a null effect and I think that it's it goes into probably the composition how men are taking it the frequency because a lot of that data is not well teased out in a lot of these studies um so you know I think I I sometimes struggle with this with patients because some of them are taking it for you know you know some what they consider legitimate reasons anxiety sleep pain um and if there's not sort of very convincing evidence that it's going to help and they're taking it maybe lower than the threshold where I know that there's good data that'll cause harm you know I guess I'm trying to be sort of honest about where we are but I think with a lot of things related to sperm I think our our level of evidence is not great are there any common over-the-counter medications that can negatively impact sperm quality Endor testosterone things like um non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs Tylenol Advil type stuff um you know ibuprofen aceta menen um things of that sort that I and others might not be aware of I'm not I'm not probing for anything in particular here I just I I know that um you know a lot of over-the-counter drugs have effects that we're just simply not aware of yeah I mean I think we probably need more data but I think currently we think all those are safe I'm curious about the pituitary pituitary gland as many listeners of this podcast already know is a gland that receives signals from the brain um the gland sits near the roof of the mouth um I think that's fair um and releases critical hormones into the bloodstream that control the output of testosterone from the testes as well as output of hormones from other glands um I know a number of people end up playing sports like football or rug or even LaCrosse or even soccer I've read our data on this you know they're heading the soccer ball quite a lot or martial arts or they get a head injury at some point and um I certainly hear a lot from people who played these high contact Sports and then to their surprise later they have diminished testosterone levels I also work with a number of military groups that talk about this you know that they leave and maybe it's from combat related stress Etc but um they wonder whether or not there's any traumatic head injury or maybe pituitary injury related um impairment to the reproductive axis that includes brain pituitary and the testes do you see that um and if somebody played a contact sport in particular a contact sport where the head was hit or they were hitting things with their head often um or if they have a TBI or had a TBI that um their reproductive Health can be impaired that's F fascinating um I have I have not I mean I think you know it's interesting I guess you know what the pituitary does you've obviously covered this before but it does go to a lot of our therapies I mean so you know for your listeners you know that pituitary produces two hormones LH lutenizing hormone and FSH follicle stimulating hormone which then stimulates the testicle so the lutenizing hormone hormone stimulates the leig cells to make testosterone and then the follicle stimulating hormone or FSH stimul sperm production so both of those are very key you know in terms of production and interestingly when exogenous testosterone is used you know it shuts down that axis as you know so we get less of these gatot tropins this LH FSH um to stimulate the testicle um and the other sort of reason that sperm production is lost with exogenous testosterone uses is actually the in testicular testosterone is much higher than serum levels so you know our serum levels are you know between 300 and 900 uh NRS per deciliter on average but in the testicle are probably 10 fold higher at least so when men are given exogenous testosterone they not producing their own the levels of testosterone in the testicle which are necessary for sperm production are much much lower um but it's interesting because I think um I am not aware of sort of how tra traumatic injuries would would do that okay um that's good to know I'm curious about the nonendocrine nonchemical so effects on sperm quality and testosterone levels so here I'm thinking about uh bunch of news stories we heard a few years ago about how Bicycle Seat pressure on the prostate or maybe it was other other portions of the um maybe was the uh nerves running to the penis itself um or surrounding areas maybe it was pelvic floor related and somehow you'll tell us I'm sure uh was impairing sexual function was it impairing sexual function in any way by impairing testosterone levels cutting off blood flow to the testes um and here perhaps the most important thing to ask straight off is um is riding a bicycle bad for male reproductive health and Sexual Health yeah these are great questions these again living in the Bay Area working in the Bay Area uh cycling is very very popular so these are questions that I get a lot so I think you know I in general like we talked about before anything that's good for your heart it's going to be good for fertility so good diet and exercise maintaining good body weight and so I always try and encourage physical fitness I think that's important but you know it may be possible that some particular um activities may put men at more risk so I think cycling could be one of them if but it would sort of depend on exactly why we think that may be a problem so I guess the theory is heat if you're in the saddle for a long time you know for these prolonged you know rides that men take you know on weekends you know hours um that maybe if there's too much heat exposure that may be the mechanism where sperm production would decline so there have been some studies say maybe five hours a week would be you know that may be too much so if you're above that level the sperm counts shown to be lower if you're less than that that may be okay so when I talk to patients about it I try and just encourage them to you know stand up in the saddle to try and again sort of air things out to try and dissipate heat if if that's the mechanism we're going to think regarding sexual dysfunction um that is thought to be pressure as you're alluding to so you know the way that the saddle is configured ideally all the pressure is put on our iscal tuberosities or our sit bones that's what I'm sitting on now but on the saddle you know there's obviously kind of the rigid nose and if there's too much pressure on that that actually squeezes between the iscal tuberosities where you know the main blood flow to the penis goes and the main nerve Supply is too and so if there's compression on this you get this sort of lack of blood flow or esema and you can get a neuropraxia as well if you crush these nerves and so that over time can lead to problems so you know some patients will say that you know after I cycle you know things are numb down there for 30 minutes um or a day or I don't get erections for that sort of same amount of time or sometimes you know men just sort of you know ride through it um and you know hopefully things come back in a day or two so that's that could be the mechanism there are some saddles you know hopefully it'll be a little safer and you know I think that this sort of first was noted probably around the 2000 or so and there is a big redesign in terms of saddles to try and make them a little bit more you know anatomically correct to try and minimize some of this and there's you know cycle fit that can be done or saddle fit rather that can be done at some of the cycling shops to try and you know look at your body position look at your size and try and find a saddle that's safer um you know not this doesn't happen to everybody I would say maybe you if you were to um serve a cyclist maybe 20 to 30% of men and women tend to be susceptible to this so I think if you are having discomfort in when you cycle whether it be pain numbness or you notice dysfunction I think certainly you should you know think about changing saddles or think about changing writing style um there's other strategies are sometimes used but you know it's absolutely something that that everybody should be aware of I me to asked this earlier but I seem to recall a study that Drew a a correlation between um amount of walking and maybe it was sperm quality but I think it was testosterone levels maybe some other metrics of um male sexual health forgive me I'm not recalling the details now um is there any evidence that walking more standing more maybe even using a standing desk uh is beneficial for um you know pelvic floor Health blood flow um prostate health it who knows could be any and all of those things in some way that is beneficial for sperm quality testosterone level and or overall male sexual health yeah I think you know one of the ways that we can characterize activity is Step count right I think I know I have a a watch that tells me that something that I look at every day and kind of strive for it and it turns out that the more active you are uh it's been shown sort of looking at you know large National Data pools across different age ranges that it is associated with testosterone levels so being more active I think is very important and that's another thing that you know everybody can do to try and improve sort of testicular function broadly but testosterone specifically and do you know whether or not that can be separated out from the relationship between being more active and less obese I mean is this something that's independent of of obesity in other words can we incentivize people to walk more um simply on the on the promise of um improved Sexual Health well I don't know sexual health will be a different one but we can I think there is association between testosterone level and step count uh across different BMI straight up so I think you know whether you're have the ideal body weight whether you have a few pounds to lose perhaps if you walk more you will see higher levels of testosterone okay and another question I meant to ask earlier and then we can um close the hatch on on exogenous testosterone therapy at least for the time being maybe we'll come back to it is um assuming that somebody can maintain adequate sperm production through the use of HCG or some other uh therapy or perhaps they don't care if they're still making sperm because they've already had children or they don't care to have children maybe they've banked sperm in any event assuming that somebody takes testosterone therapy because they were prescribed that um let's say in your clinic let's just use you in your clinic as an example and they are happy with the psychological and physical consequences of that and they are comfortable with the tradeoffs is there any increased risk of say Pro State cancer or other forms of cancer and here I'm going to assume that this person is keeping their um their lipid levels in check right because you hear about some hyper lipidemia with testosterone therapies let's assume that they're either taking a Statin or they're not taking a Statin they're getting enough cardiovascular exercise that things are in check in terms of LDL HDL apob and all of that and their testosterone levels are now high normal and they're feeling better um and they don't have to worry about sperm production because they're either maintaining it or it's been banged or they don't care about that um is there an increased risk of prostate cancer my understanding is the answer is no but what's the real deal does taking testosterone therapy assuming all other things are being held in a in check in a healthy check does it increase the risk of any kind of cancer yeah I mean this is a another great question because I think there's a lot of myths around testosterone and that's one of them you know this the origin is that prostate cancer is thought to be or is sort of Androgen mediated you know one of the Nobel Prize um you know again decades ago was awarded because it was found that when we lowered man's testosterone the prostate cancer would regress dramatically so that put that association between testosterone and prostate cancer so then the concern became if we were to you know either replace testosterone or augment testosterone give a man testosterone is that going to alter his risk or increase his risk um so I think we have pretty convincing data that that's not the case you know there's lots of longitudinal data spanning decades where if man it's given testosterone um it doesn't change its risk the reason for that in sort of seeming cont you know this contradiction between you know prostate cancer therapy where we lower testosterone where if you give a man testosterone doesn't change his prostate cancer risk uh is not certain but there's this popular model called the saturation model so that once there's enough testosterone in the body and it's tends to be a fairly low level um that all the sort of the prostate testosterone receptors you know you kind of think of as have been filled so if you were to give man more testosterone doesn't change anything regarding the prostate cancer prostate growth any of that so it is it is safe when we're looking at prostate cancer as as an outcome I'd like to just take a brief break and thank one of our sponsors which is element element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't that means plenty of salt sodium magnesium and pottassium the so-called electrolytes and no sugar now salt magnesium and potassium are critical to the function of all the cells in your body in particular to the function of your nerve cells also called neurons now people of course have varying levels of requirements for sodium so people with hypertension or prehypertension probably shouldn't increase their sodium however many people are surprised to find that by increasing their sodium intake they are able to function better cognitively and physically and that's because a lot of people especially people who are following low carbohydrate or even moderate carbohydrate and really clean diets often times they're excreting a lot of water and electrolytes along with it and simply by increasing their electrolyte intake using element they just feel better and function better I typically drink element first thing in the morning when I wake up in order to hydrate my body and make sure I have enough electrolytes and while I do any kind of physical training and certainly I drink element in my water when I'm in the sauna and after going in the sauna because that causes quite a lot of sweating if you'd like to try element you can go to drink element that's lm.com huberman to claim a free element sample pack with your purchase again that's drink element lnt.com SL huberman getting back to prostate health and um neural innervation of the penis and and blood flow to the penis you mentioned the bike seat related issues are there other things that men should do in order to maintain prostate health Stave off prostate diseases and to maintain healthy blood flow and neural inovation of the penis for obvious reasons and we'll get um into the specifics of those reasons in our later discussion yeah I mean I think that you know I always kind of think of the penis as a user a loser organ so that doesn't mean necessarily you have to have sex but you know normally we get erections every night so that should be maintained and if there's any reason to sort of suspect that that may not be going on um usually in my practice that would be from you know some pelvic surgical intervention or something like that sometimes we can intervene to try and maintain that you're talking about spontaneous erections during sleep right so um and short of assigning one's partner to uh to check um frequency and T Essence what is the uh way that men would know that that's happening are you talking about waking up with an erection is that a requisite for knowing that nocturnal erections are occurring well yeah that think you yeah you kind of caught me I think that's a good question so I think a lot of times you won't know but I think if you have sort of normal response you know when either by yourself with a partner I think that generally means um that you are going to get normal erection so I think I guess when I say use it or lose it it doesn't mean necessarily the man has to stimulate himself or kind of um make sure that he does have you know adequate function because usually most of that normal function just occurs you know with his nocturnal penal 2 mein which we all get you know I think sometimes men do notice when they wake up at night sometimes in the morning you wake up with an erection men notice that but the absence of that doesn't mean it's not happening it likely is just you know most people sleep through it which is normal otherwise men would never get any sleep because of many many times a night um so I think you know again if you're not having normal function I think that's something you should probably see you know a physician about and then same for like urinary function I think if it bothers you if there's you know if you're waking up at night if you have to go to the bathroom often if your stream is getting weaker those are all sort of complaints that we hear about what is often um my understanding is that it's uh normal to wake up perhaps once during the night to urinate um and this is of course assuming and again forgive me for all the caveats but I've done this long enough that you know if I don't get really granular about some of this then say well what if I drank you know 32 ounces of fluid right before sleep and I'm urinating three times per night well we're assuming that people are tapering their liquid intake as they approach bedtime um and that waking up once maybe twice but once in the middle of the night to urinate is normal for somebody let's say age I don't know 18 to 40 and maybe from 40 to uh 100 um that number might be in the uh one to two times per night is that about right yeah I mean I think once a night yeah is normal for most men and then I think you know if things start to bother you I think you could certainly see somebody but it's hard to get better than once or twice a night for most men um my understanding is that there's a pretty good relationship between the um nocturnal erection and the amount of REM sleep rapid eye movement sleep that one is getting that this tends to be more frequent toward morning as the proportion of rapid ey movement sleep increases I don't know if that's true or not but I found a couple of studies that at least point in that direction no pun intended uh so that raises a a bigger issue that we haven't talked about yet which is getting adequate amounts of quality sleep each night and um I think for most people that's 7 to n hours ideally um which means getting sufficient slow wave deep sleep as well as WRA and ey movement sleep but nowadays A lot of people including young people who are not working excessive hours are um getting you know four five six hours of sleep per night is there a direct relationship between getting less than sufficient amounts of sleep and sperm quality testosterone levels and um Sexual Health yeah I mean I think certainly there's reasonable data for seman quality and there tends to be um you know what we call like in science sort of a U-shaped relationship so that it's not sort of lineer so as you get more sleep things are better it there's sort of there's this concept of too much sleep and not enough sleep so the ideal I think as you pointed out is 7 to 9 hours and for men that are not getting that se quality tends to be lower and then for men getting too much um we also see a decline and you know why that is is not certain these again if you're able to get that much sleep maybe there's other things as well that we should look at but um so I think kind of getting in that ideal sleep amount is best for semen quality and probably for broad ttic function as well you keep bringing up semen quality um in a way that makes me wonder whether or not is seamen quality a proxy for overall vitality and health or is testosterone level appr proxy for overall vitality and health um it sounds like semen quality is the the metric that you keep coming back to in a way that um I have to assume reflects your you know your clinical experience and the the the many um papers that you've authored in this area um I think for people that hear seamen quality and who are not interested in conceiving children now or who are which of course could include people who've already had children or who don't want children um seam in quality sounds like something that relates to fertility but is seam inquality something that is a good goal for those who are interested in overall male vitality and health is it is it one of the better metrics of overall male vitality and health well I think you know it's I think it's an excellent marker for overall health I think there are studies that support it can be a measure of how healthy you are you know if you look at men with more health problems they tend have lower semen quality but also if you look at semen quality just by itself and then you look into the future how these men tend to do if they have higher semen quality um they tend to live longer need to go to the doctor less lower rates of cancer so I think there's a lot of different ways that Seamon quality may be a good barometer of Health um you know it's you know why that link exists I think is not is not known but there's lots of theories so one is that you know probably about 10% of the male genome is devoted to reproduction um and so it makes sense given that we only have about you know 24,000 genes in the body that there's a lot of um you know overlap so one gene that plays a role in reproduction may play a role in you the cardiovascular system or the neurological system and so if we get the first you know sort of sign that reproduction is not perfect there may be some other consequences down the line um another sort of hypothesis is that again sort of going along this line that reproduction is one of the first things that we see is that um you know gestation is sort of very critical to our you know existence right and if perturbations to that system have prolonged um you know effects so the so-called sort of Developmental origin of adult disease or the Barker hypothesis um and so we know that you know premature children have higher risk of cardiovascular disease or been studies to show that but we also know that you know these gestational effects can also uh play out on reproductive function too so that also may be kind of a link you know sort of early seating of reproductive function and then that's maybe the first marker that we're going to have for other health effects later on um there also just sort of sort of inherent um sort of similarities between um reproduction and some other sort of social effects so you know kind of one sort of confounding Factor when we're looking at some of these studies I talked about looking at mortality for example and semon quality is that you know there's sort of factors that necessarily involve reproduction so your children and having a partner and having a partner prolongs life um having kids prolong life even though it feels like kids are killing you if you look at studies men with kids tend to live longer um so you know that's another possible explanation but I think you know really sort of this health um you know link between fertility I think is sort of a powerful one so I do think it should be a barometer I think that you know it should be a sort of when I've given lectures on this I call it the six Vital sign I think it's something that we should probably check because if there is you know sort of lower levels that may tell us about something else going on you know when when men come in for infertility evaluations a lot of time we do diagnose you know these new medical problems sometimes we diagnose cancer you know sort of alluding to some of the questions you've asked diabetes and some other you know very significant genetic conditions as well and you know the first way that we would identify it is reproductive failure because their sperm counts are low um and other things so it is something I think that it's sort of it's very important I think for people to realize um and it would be great I think you know another um I think advantage to like the Centers for Disease Control for example to start tracking it would it be a good idea for um males in their 20s and 30s to get a sperm analysis just have a Baseline I confess I'm 47 now um one thing I wish I had done in my 20s was to get my uh blood hormone profiles and lipid profiles done when I was in my teens and 20s because I'd have something to compare to um I started doing that in my mid-30s and I'm so glad I did because I can now compar to my mid-30 levels I started including um sperm analysis about eight years ago um with the intention of freezing sperm and did that um because I was also reading at that time about the increased risk of autism um in offspring of males older than 40 something that I really would like your take on but um it seems like it's inexpensive enough to do a sperm analysis um I think now they people can get it done at home they have male mail kits although I don't understand how the motility could be maintained if you're mailing your sperm back um at room temperature or you know it's heading through the post office now everyone's imagining all these sperm traveling through the the Postal Service it's out they're out there folks um yeah what what are your thoughts should um should people invest the I think it was a couple hundred dollars to get a sperm analysis more um costly to get the DNA fragmentation than you get up into the low thousands um but if people have the disposable income is it a good idea for them to do I mean I think it's a worthwhile test I think more information is always good um you know I think sort of one of the same reasons that um you know you're talking about checking like lipid levels or tell you know men and women to get blood pressure checked I think you know getting that sort of early Health indicator I think can be important I think you know going back to not knowing exactly why semen quality is telling us about health what the exact link may be you know means that if somebody is coming in with a low sperm count or completely absent sperm count it's hard to know exactly how to counsel that that person other than there maybe reproductive difficulties um but I think just as sort of a marker for Reproductive potential I think it's useful and like you said I think become a lot easier one of the sort of Innovations in the space um and you know as somebody that you know is in the reproductive world I think it's just really great to see sort of this influx in capital and new companies coming in they're trying to just decrease the barrier to you know getting a cement test used to be have to go to a lab schedule an appointment sometimes they would send you to a bathroom which can be uncomfortable you know because people are doing you know you know what people do in a bathroom just next to you trying to collect oh they would send them into a in a common space bathro they wouldn't even give them the quiet room with the with the red light which is uh right what I hear they do now yeah some of them do have videos so there are some higher level oh I didn't even mean videos I just I I think that um okay yes I've done this I'll just I mean I'm trying to normalize things related to all aspects of mental health physical health um so um yeah I I decided to freeze sperm and basically they sent me to a room I went to a university based CL it actually wasn't Stanford but different University and um uh yeah they put the cup through the window they give you the cup they um they close the door and they tell you that as long as that red light is on over the door no one's going to walk in and then they leave and I think the the Assumption now is that uh you figure it out one way or another um how to provide the sample and then you put the sample back through the the thing and then one thing these clinics really need to work out is that anytime you're walking out you see the people processing your sample as you walk out so there's all this um this figing of of uh you know anonymity but really it isn't there you know because they're like see you later and you're like great you you know they they rarely ask you questions on the way out but it's a pretty simple process overall and um and I must say that the the data are informative you get the you know you get the volume number motile forwardly motile I did opt for the DNA fragmentation um data um and I I just love data so I think it's really interesting but again um and maybe this is a good time to flag this what this set of findings I believe believe that there seems to be a small but statistically significant increase in the number of autistic births due to pregnancies where the male was over 40 at the time of um of conception um so I figured you know why not freeze some sperm and it's relatively inexpensive yeah yeah so I think paternal age is also you know something that's increasing in this country so over the last 40 years or so we've seen that the average paternal age has increased from about 27 and a half to about 31 um and I should say that this is all fathers so um birth certificate data or birth data is collected a maternal level so you know when a child is born somebody comes in to collect data on the birth so they ask you know all the characteristics of the mother and they also ask characteristics of the father you know age education obviously region of the country the child was born um so we don't know you know what number child that was for the father we know it for the mother they do ask you know is this your first second third Etc child um so the father unfortunately we just have data that sort of all lumped together um but over the last again 40 years we've seen that increase interesting over the last 40 years the youngest father was 11 and the oldest was 88 11 quite a span yeah 88 mhm goodness unrelated I I don't know I assume I assume goodness it's anonymized data but I 11 uh I have to ask this sorry to uh take us on a slight tangent but what is the average age of puberty in males in the United States um now yeah so asking about I guess sort of Sparky when like sperm production begins so um yeah there are a lot of markers of of puberty secondary sexual characters of beard growth deepening of voice Etc they happen at different rates in different people but yeah thank you um at what point um are um yeah males undergoing puberty yeah uh at at the level of of that we're talking about here yeah so it's yeah there has been data that we're going through puberty a little bit early now than we used to um but it really varies so you know I think it's not um you know just like testosterone ranges between like 300 to 900 that's a wide range for anybody I think for most individuals you know puberty is you know probably 12 to kind of 15 16 in general so I just give sort of a very wide range when we're going to say that's okay and you know some of the data I'm basing it on is um when sperm production begins in boys and it's actually you know not that simple to be able to figure that out because you know we don't generally talk to you know young boys about how to masterb how to collect and then check on that but there's something called first morning voided urine where we can actually look at that and there have been some studies done and they see if there were sort of you know nocturnal emissions whether there's sperm in there and so generally it probably starts around um the earliest would be kind of 11 12 13 but usually most it's probably a little later so maybe I'll refine that puberty and move it a little bit later probably 14 to 16 um is when probably about 70 80% of boys are going to have produced started producing sperm my understanding is that in females puberty is also shifting earlier perhaps at a more dramatic rate than appears to be the case for males well I think there is some data for males too I think um but again for your listeners I don't want to you know have this onslaught of you know pediatricians seeing kids that haven't you know when boys haven't gone through puberty by a certain age so I think it's still fairly wide let's get back to age of the father and issues like autism um what are the data there um and this to me is a practical issue because I think if there's one obvious takeaway from our discussion today it's that um males should probably not wait until they're trying to conceive in order to assess their reproductive Health at the level of sperm quality um testosterone levels perhaps but at least sperm quality but um but perhaps men should also be freezing their sperm if in fact conceiving children after 40 places their children at far greater risk for autism I mean my understanding is that the rates of autism are somewhere between 1 and 80 you'll hear as high as 1 and 50 male birth but I think it's probably more like one in 60 to 80 is that about right um and that the age of the father is a risk factor yeah I think that this gets into sort of the larger issue of you know how men sort of perceive fertility so so you know we know that as women age fertility declines uh but the oldest father ever is 96 so the biologic potential certainly persists wait I want to know how long he lived to see how long his child grow up we he conceived at 96 amaz supposedly supposedly yeah well I'm assuming he did not meet his grandchildren at least not the grandchild of that child so wow how long did he live um you know I well so this this is a man in India it's sort of a famous story but supposedly um he had a child he had that child with him on uh like they're waiting at a bus stop he fell asleep the child was kidnapped that led to divorce so yeah Dreadful sort of a a horrible end but the wife was also old not not that old but in her 50s goodness so yeah wow um tragic and and incredible story for separate reasons um okay I'll get my head around this 96-year-old uh conceiving a child okay please continue yeah uh so people I think or men think that the sort of the um you know their you know fertile road is sort of infinite um but I think that's very much not the case so as you're alluding to people have looked into risks for older fathers so you know about a hundred years ago was first noticed that dwarfism or condop plasia was more common in last born children So eventually that link was made um and since then other conditions too so there's like these neuros psychiatric conditions you're talking talking about like autism is certainly one bipolar schizophrenia people have looked at and also linked that with older age you know Less attainment in school you know failing grades all that has been shown to be a little bit more common with older fathers so you know why I think all these exist there can be sort of different explanations um you know one explanation for the autism Association I'll talk about um you know some of this more genetic or um of mutation reasons but one thing that some people say is that you know it could be sort of a hereditary trait and so it may be that you know men that display some sort of autistic characteristics you know maybe they take a little longer to meet a partner and so it sort of delayed childbearing so maybe that's that's one possible explanation but I think you know there's been a lot of convincing evidence that there could be you know real epigenetic changes that occur with age and mutational changes that occur with age um I think I read a statistic and you would know more being a neuroscientist that 84% of the the genes in our body are expressed somewhere in the central nervous system is that sounds about right yeah I don't want to stamp my name to that uh um but that sounds about right so um it's it's estimated that every year we generate about two mutations in our um you know sperm DNA so you can imagine that you know a 40-year-old is going to have you know 20 or 40 more mutations um than a 20-year-old so that rate does go up and if you're just randomly sprinkling mutations you know in you know a genome that they're more likely to sort of manifest in you know maybe neuros pych atric conditions um so there are you know data convincing data that shows that that does occur now again there's billions of Bas pairs in the body so these random mutations likely most of them will will not result in anything but there can be some meaningful ones so for example a condr plasia it's due to a a mutation in fiberblast growth factor receptor um and what's interesting is that this condition is not that rare right based on sort of these rare mutations you'd expect this would you know occur maybe about one in 100 million but it turns out this these conditions occur in about one in I think 30 to 50,000 or so so there's sort of the discrepancy based on sort of mutational rate that we expect based on age and the rate that we actually see so the explanation for this is something called Selfish spermatogonial selection so what this suggests is that some of these mutations that occur randomly occur in proliferation Pathways and so it gives the sperm that contain these sort of advantages over their you know brothers and sisters that don't have them for example and so then they out compete the other sperm and so they're more likely to lead to a child rather than sort of a random smattering you can actually see that some of these mutations are more common in older men than younger men if you look you screen for some of these mutations and you know some of these Pathways um again the longer that we're exposed to life there's just more likely to be you know different chemical exposures other exposures and so people have looked at epigenetic signatures sort of these signatures that um you know that dictate which genes are going to be expressed and which aren't and there are different patterns between older and younger fathers and you know why what triggering those is not known but there are differences so those could also potentially explain you know some of these risks that we see um you know it used to be that people thought that you know if you're an older father maybe there's a lot of advantages you know for the kids right because if you're you're more resourced right I always tell patients that you know when they come to see me for like erection problems or anything I always say nothing gets better with age right and that's mostly true although they've pointed out that um salary often goes up with age and wisdom goes up with age so you would imagine if you're more resourced maybe the kids are going to also have an advantage to that but you know again there's a lot of convincing data that that's that's probably not the case um there's even there's one study that I saw that showed that if you look at MRIs uh of brains of children just after birth they're actually a little smaller for older fathers compared to younger fathers so um I think there are some you know sort of talking about kind of neurocognitive development um some of those effects and there's also been um studies looking at cancer risk too so higher risk of breast cancer prostate cancer and adult children higher risk of you know leukemia or CNS cancers in children as well so I think the more we look the more we find out of these associations with paternal age um so I think it's something you certainly to be aware of I think you talking about mitigation strategies I think sort of Education would be important for you know couples to try earlier you know individuals to try earlier to conceive you know if we think it's a mutational reason I think um you know certainly freezing sperm I think is a is a good option as well my understanding is that um analysis of DNA fragmentation in sperm does not allow for selection of the best sperm on the basis of uh DNA composition um translated to English what I mean is in order to tell whether or not this the DNA are mutated in a sperm you have to kill the sperm basically so um and since um in a given pool of sperm so to speak um there will be forward motile non-motile twitchers twitching in place dead sperm um some percentage of dead sperm or immotile sperm is presumably normal some small percentage hopefully um and that some might have some DNA fragmentation some might not so um is the way to address this um averages what I'm hearing here is that if you haven't already had kids or if you want more kids um that you might want to know about your sperm quality I would say you do um and that if you can afford it you might want to take a look at DNA fragmentation data um but having done this um what one receives is a chart that goes from Red bad to Green good and then they put the arrow hopefully in the green zone and then you say oh good you know I'm in the green zone I don't have fragmented DNA in my sperm but really that's an averaging of all the sperm right it could be that as you age that some percentage of those sperm have fragmented DNA and um if one of those is the one that successfully um wins the egg so to speak um fertilizes the egg then that fragmented DNA containing sperm is going to propagate that into your Offspring so are there any technologies that allow men to um select or for or improve the DNA of their sperm not just the motility I me yeah I wish right that's sort of the Holy Grail because I think he pointed out sort of a variant of right the Heisenberg uncertainty principle is that we can't if we identify which sperm is bad we're necessarily going to destroy it so to tell you know which one is harboring these mutations um would be great but I think we're not there yet I mean one thing that we do do is wash sperm so we do sort of select the most modal sperm we clear out the dead ones um and I think embas are pretty good at telling which sperm they think are better but you again we don't have any real objective data to try and understand you know which are harboring something or other but I think if we understood more about this link with age or again other conditions um hopefully we would be able to stop some of this pass through let's get back to the prostate um this incredible gland tell tell us about the prostate I I think we hear about the prostate we hear about prostate cancer um people might have heard that it's involved in the ejaculatory response it's involved in erections it's involved in a number of things if you could give us a you know a catalog of things that the prostate does um I you spent a lot of time thinking about this gland what are some of the cooler things that it that it does that we don't know about um you know how do we keep it healthy uh and what are the consequences of not keeping it healthy yeah so the prostate is a gland about the size of a walnut it sits behind the bladder and it's involved in reproduction it produces some of the proteins enzymes that are necessary for you know sperm to be supported and you know the ejacate to kind of keep the the sperm healthy um in the female reproductive tract so you know it functions in reproduction and then basically after reproduction is done it doesn't really serve any useful function so then it just becomes a problem essentially so the urethra which is where we pee through so it connects the bladder you know to exits the body um runs right through the prostate and as we age the prostate does get bigger that's sort of a known thing and as the prostate gets bigger it creates sort of more resistance in this pipe and so it makes the bladder have to work harder and that leads to a lot of the symptoms you know that we've been talking about already you know waking up at night weak stream this need to uh urinate urgently um sometimes feeling like you're not emptying all the way so it's sort of a consequence of the prostate um sort of being there uh in terms of ways that you can keep the prostate healthy I think that there's really nothing that you know necessarily you can do I think that you know one thing I talked to patients about when these sort of symptoms start is to know some of the triggers so um you know like you mentioned drinking a lot before you go to bed so if you don't want to wake up at night that's not a good practice you know may even want to go into bed sort of a little dehydrated just so you can try and last the night um there are some you know particular drinks or foods that tend to be more irritating so like spicy foods acidic Foods those can sometimes irritate the lining of the bladder and make you have to pee a little bit more you know caffeine is a diuretic uh so it makes us urinate more and also um uh can also irritate the bladder and give you that sensation alcohol will do the same thing so I think you know kind of knowing some of those triggers May kind of saave off some of the symptoms a little bit but you know again if you enjoy those vices and you're willing to tolerate it that's okay too I'm hearing more and more about a practice of people taking low dose to dofil seis um low dose meaning in the neighborhood of 2.5 to 5 milligrams per day um not necessarily for erectile dysfunction but for prostate health and was um somewhat surprised to learn that those drugs were actually developed first for treatment of prostate health to increase blood flow to the prostate um is that true and um is there good reason to um think about taking 2.5 to 5 milligrams of tadalfil per day simply for maintaining blood flow to the prostate and thereby maintaining or improving prostate health I mean certainly it can do that that it can definitely help with some of these urinary symptoms that we've been talking about you know looking at Placebo control trial sort of our highest level of evidence does show that you know low dose of tadalfil these two and a half to 5 milligram these daily dosing um can help with these urinary symptoms so I think that not necessarily it's a preventative measure but for men that are bothered you know otherwise I think most men probably wouldn't want to take a pill every day but certainly if you have some of these symptoms it can definitely help with urinary bother and then the added benefit as you also alluded to is it can help with erectile function as well even at the 2.5 to 5 milligram dosage that does interesting um yeah my experience is that there are a lot of people who would love to take pills every day um there seems to be a kind of binary distribution where um and here I'm just thinking about the malale that I hear from because I hear from of course males and females but um I get a lot of questions about what can I take what can I take what can I take um and uh but as you point out there's also a category of of men who seem to um not take anything not want to measure anything not want to take anything but especially not take anything and then there's the other group um and the other group somewhat surprisingly seem to be the L the younger excuse me population um who maybe grew up in the YouTube era or maybe in the era where Sexual Health was discussed more openly than it was certainly when I was in college I mean the extent of sexual health discussions in my high school and I went to a very good high school were um it only takes one sperm which as he pointed out is true for IVF but more is better if you're trying to conceive natur naturally um and um there were discussions about communication and consent obviously super important um and then um they just kind of turned us loose uh to learn from our friends and other sources I mean that and family sometimes had the discussion sometimes didn't um uh different families different discussions obviously um so very very little information nowadays I think there's a lot more discussion about these things and so the 20 to 40 year-old male crowd seems to be the crowd that are asking yeah what can I take these are also the people who are getting on testosterone therapy early perhaps without the need I just want to flag that because um I I think uh if I understand correctly um you're seeing a lot of testosterone therapy that perhaps people don't need is that right well I think it's a mix some people probably do need it but I think that you know before starting it everybody should be aware of all the risks and you've kind of highlighted some but testosterone any any medication right is going to have some risks and so everybody needs to be aware of what those are and for testosterone reproduction is certainly one of them and if they're not already doing all the other things getting adequate sleep limiting their alcohol intakes not smoking getting exercise Etc seems that testosterone therapy would not be the primary entry point like first work out all the right all the basics I think that's the big difference I think nowadays the what should I take question comes up early when people aren't necessarily doing all the other things um that they could do to promote their health anyway this is observational on my part um you're the one whose Clinic they're showing up uh to um I have a question about UTI um we hear about UTI urinary tract infections um in women pretty often um do men get UTI if they're getting more than one UTI per year is that abnormal um should uh men be uh examined for um this bladder arthra prostate penile architecture I know there are ways that people can come in I was reading about this prior to this episode that um you can ingest a die and then they can die image the whole apparatus is that right that's true without having to cut anything is right is that worth people doing or is that only under conditions where people are experiencing some some um some vexing issue yeah I think that some of those tests should only be done if there's a problem but I think a male urinary tract infection is rare enough that it should be evaluated so women have very short urethras but men have a very long urethra right it has to go through the entire penile urethra the prostatic urethra up into the bladder and so the way a urinary tract infection would happen you know one way would be that a bacteria actually gets all the way you know back and that's just a much longer Trek um and so if something rare like that does happen we look for anatomic causes for that so there can be different scar tissue in the uretha for example there can be stones in the bladder there can be stones in the kidney sometimes men AR empty their bladders all the way so those those men should be evaluated because there can be some pathology that we could hopefully identify in correct let's talk about erectile disfunction um I put out the call for questions in anticipation of this episode and um no surprise um at least 30% of the questions from males were about erectile dysfunction um or uh questions about what's normal in terms of libido level kind of interesting right you know and we'll deal with the first question first but um what are the most common causes of rectile dysfunction are they hormonal in nature I think that's a a common belief that if people are experiencing erectile dysfunction that it's because their testosterone levels are too low hence all the interest in um testosterone therapy um or are there other say blood flow related pelvic flow related neural um brain to um to body neural connections that are responsible I'm guessing it's all of these things how do we parse this um and yeah what tell us about erectile dysfunction what you most commonly see what you most commonly do in order to treat it yeah so you know erectile dysfunction as you know it's sort of the inability to consistently achieve and maintain an erection and it's fairly common um you know of all the conditions I see that's definitely the number one so you know if you look at men over the age of 40 over half will have some trouble trouble with erections under age of 40 is probably about 15 to 20% so this is a very common condition that we see in terms of the ideology it can vary a little bit you know we used to think that they were primarily psychogenic um but that was you know years that was decades ago now we know that most of them are organic so it's actually a blood flow issue so the most common conditions just sort of nationally would be the same things that cause blood flow problems anywhere in the body so high blood pressure diabetes you know atherosclerosis anything that sort of can impair blood getting you know to the end organ um and sometimes you know there has been data that you know trouble with erections can actually predate other more you know serious you know vascular conditions so the blood vessels in the penis the penal arteries are about 1 millimeter you know and the heart and the Brain they're much larger so you know it's much easier to olude a small vessel than a large vessel so that's why there have been some studies to support that it's sort of an early marker for vascular disease um so I think looking at those risk factors you you know sort of Lifestyle obesity again is another is a common one um endocrine disorders is actually fairly small it's probably less than 10% probably around 5% or so um pelvic cancer treatment is another very common one after you know treatment for prostate cancer whether it be radio therapy or surgical therapy bladder cancer um sometimes rectal colar rectal cancer that treatment also anytime it we you know um involving some of the nerves and the the vasculature and the pelvis that can also imp impact uh erectile function as well what about hernia hernia that should be separate so sometimes if there you know I always say that in medicine you can never say never um but you know generally if that was going to manifest as a rectile function it would probably be due to maybe some pain syndroms can rarely happen during just the early postoperative period but the blood supply the nervous Supply is separate so you said something very important for people to hear so I'm going to highlight it um you said that less than 10% of erectile dysfunction is due to a hormonal issue um I don't know how much time you're spending on YouTube and the internet but um that is going to be a shocker for a lot of males out there because so much of the discussion around testosterone is around libido and sexual function so um it's key for people to hear that it's also key for them to know about this other 90% um when you say blood flow issue then what is the common first pass for treatment and again I and forgive me for listing this off over and over but we are assuming here that people have gotten their body weight down they're sleeping enough they're not in ingesting excessive alcohol they're not smoking or vaping they're not smoking cannabis um or doing the Edibles although maybe we should talk about Edibles and cannabis and endocrine effects we'll do that later um doing all the things right avoiding doing the wrong things too often or at least completely so we're assuming they're doing all that that correctly their testosterone levels are somewhere in that 300 to 900 nanogram per deciliter range that's typical for the the so-called reference range uh in at least in the US I think it goes up to 1,200 or maybe 1400 in other countries but um as other countries like to point out um but it starts at two no I'm just kidding um but assuming they're doing everything correctly and it's not a testosterone issue then if it's a blood flow issue um meaning they haven't had treatment for some pelvic cancer what is the first line of treatment yeah so assuming that lifestyle you know and all that has been optimized medical treatment has been optimized there's a lot that we can do I always tell men as long as you have a penis we can always make it hard so there's there's a tremendous amount I'm sure you're the most um popular doctor in your field do that yeah that usually does kind of ease everybody um so usually we start with oral therapy so phosph phosphodiester inhibitor therapy so that would be like selenop or viag talil seis ail Stendra venil litra and would you be willing to talk about some of the specifics there are you um is the typical thing to put people on this 2.5 to 5 milligrams per day low dose or to um give the higher doses that are more commonly used uh for rectile dysfunction per se I think it depends you know why we're putting them on and how much sex they have too you know on average people probably have sex you know partnered sex maybe once a week on average you know when we're looking looking at men in their kind of 30s and Beyond you know sometimes it can be a few more times a week than that but you know if they're having sex every day or very often then sometimes a daily dose can be useful but generally most men are on just on demand U because they're going to fall into that you know maybe about you know a few times a month category so that's usually where we start and you know there is sort of a titration that can be done you can go slightly you know higher doses or lower doses so usually we start in the middle to the higher doses um and you know we talk about some of the side effects they may have but those probably help 60 to 70% of men um and they work well you know in terms of another common question is how do we decide which one we're going to start sometimes insurance will tell us which one we're going to do um that's a common one you know all these medications tend to be somewhat similar one difference tends to be the time of onset you know how quickly they reach Peak levels in the body and then also how quickly they're cleared from the body so tadalfil is somewhat different and then it lasts longer the halflife is about 20 hours or so so it's sort of marketed as a weekend pill so some people like the idea of that you know taking a pill on Friday still having some left on Saturday um but for others you know we start with with one of the other ones the fact that these drugs like toal Phil uh also called Calis right is seal the brand name right okay and um Viagra is that a brand name right stands for um what is the generic name oh selenop s okay um so because they are effective in such a large percentage cases what does that say about the vascular system of all these males that are um having erectile dysfunction but then it's getting resolved by these drug treatments is that in other words somebody comes into your clinic they're having this issue you prescribe um one of these drugs they come back and say everything's working great or maybe they don't come back they just you know send an email say everything's great um but do you need to have a discussion with that person about their over overall vascular health because if few minutes ago you told us that the fact that they weren't getting erections due to what now appears to be a vascular issue um can be resolved for the panol tissue but um is it going to solve their other vascular issues or should those people be on the lookout for cerebrovascular cardiovascular disease that can potentially cause things at least as bad as erectile dysfunction and may be worse yeah absolutely well I think they should be screened so you know sometimes I'm diagnosing in the first doctor that they're seeing in a long long time um but otherwise I do encourage them to see a primary care doctor to be screened for you know blood pressure lipid levels you know fasting U blood glucose all those things again sort of for early markers of some of these sometimes they're identified sometimes not but I think it's you know I think we kind of talked about sort of the ideal patient that's perfect body weight nothing else is going on but that's as you know a very rare entity so usually there's something that can be done to be optimized and I don't I try not to be alarmist about this but I do want to you know encourage men to sort of take ownership of the health because that sometimes can improve um you know some of these conditions but again we have terrific medications for for men in whom we cannot what are the common side effects of these drugs so they're baso dilator so they open up blood vessels so we get some of Target effects so headache facial flushing back aches leg cramps indigestion nasal congestion those would be the most common before the last Super Bowl there was some press about the fact that a lot of the players were taking these drugs at low dosages before the game presumably to increase blood flow to their muscles and brain is that is that what the rational was I think so yeah you know another we talked about sort of how cycling may lead to erectile problems or sexual problems there has been some data looking at taking like biago or one of these medications the AL to alil before a ride again to try and increase circulation to decrease the chance of any of the negative effects of prolonged saddle pressure so it sounds like just increasing blood flow and lowering blood pressure slightly is just a good thing all around yeah I think there's certainly a benefit yeah because these medications were originally I think as you're alluding to were developed as a blood pressure treatment and this was sort of an amazing of Target effect that has turned into a billion dollar industry so you mentioned about 10% or less of erectile dysfunction is due to endocrine issues was it 60 to 70% can be resolved with um with these blood flow enhancers I know it's a terribly non uh non-clinical non-scientific way describe the Viagra Calis toil um Etc um what about the remaining percentage and are there other treatments that um you you prescribed or or given um in which cases do you need to uh resort to um I guess more invasive approaches yeah so another therapy we have is urethal suppository so you can actually put a medication in the tip of the penis it's then absorbed by the rest of the penis also inject it's suppository suppository or a gel or a jelly yeah um so it's also a basa dilator sort of the concept is very similar um some times that you know is is okay for men and they tolerate it it's uh safe for partners as well um it can tingle a little bit so we definitely let men know because um one of the main medications does cause like a little bit of a a burn as well why would somebody do this as opposed to taking the pill form of the drugs we were just talking about mostly efficacy would be a big one um and so this this this can sometimes help where others cannot so that's one uh penile injections are another common therapy so the efficacy of penile injections are probably 80 to 90% uh again we're injecting basa dilators into the penis so the idea just opens up blood vessels easier to get and to keep erections you can imagine there's a huge psychological barrier to putting an needle in your penis is this something that the patients are doing for themselves at home or that you're doing is it long lasting is that something you do at the clinic and then they come back every few weeks or so no yeah this is an on demand treatment so we we teach them how to do it the first time I do it with us in clinic I ideally we try and get an erection that lasts probably 20 to 30 minutes so we usually start at a low dose and then they just increase at home until they get you know an erection that last for that amount of time is it injected subcutaneous or actually into the um goodness the meteor tissue of of the penis that's right into the erecti bodies directly yeah and they you only have to inject one side they do communicate with each other most men say it's fine it's a small it's a very small gauge needle about as big as you know a few strains of hair like I have an appointment over in Opthalmology and I've seen injections into the human eyeball and it is incredible how fast and how painless that procedure is when it's done by the right person nobody should try that at home on their own but when it's done by a skilled opthalmologist it's just striking you know you hear you think about needle in the eye you know what's worse it's like the childhood rhyme right stick a needle in my eyes like can't think of anything worse but um maybe you know an injection in the penis sounds almost as bad but you're telling me that if patients are prescribed this that they can do this with with limited if any discomfort well it does have a high dropout rate surprise surprise um yeah I think no one's excited about it you know it's I guess the mood can sometimes be affected but a lot of couples are very comfortable with it again it's very efficacious the part the man can do it his partner can do it um so it does work well and I I guess here we're sort of ascending the the list of um invasiveness right um what what is at the the sort of top tier of invasiveness for for etile dysfunction so then we go into penal implants so there's actually a surgical procedure we can do to put a device inside the penis that can help men be hard when they want to and that comes in sort of two main forms there's either non-inflatable or inflatable so the non-inflatable is sort of a bendable um it's you know has sort of a metal core and so when men don't want to have sex they bend it down when they're ready for sex they can kind of bend it up it's really just they are on demand yes H yeah interesting yeah so it's very simple to use um sort of the more I gu kind of um sort of natural form would be the inflatable so when you're not using it it's deflated and then when you're ready to use it it's inflated and you inflate it with basically a pump that's in the scrotum so all this is sort of surgically implanted inside a man all under the skin you know unless you know what you're looking for it' be very difficult to tell if a man has it or doesn't have it but when he's ready he pumps it up and it moves fluid from a reservoir you which usually is also it's also surgically implanted into the penis to get a rigid erection what is the relationship between psychological arousal and erection as it relates to these Technologies I mean the way you're describing it sounds purely mechanical right um we're talking about nocturnal erections which I suppose people could be having erotic dreams but I don't think that's a prerequisite for nocturnal erections at all right so um is the idea that if adequate blood flow is achieved then any signal from the brain can initiate a Cascade of blood flow that creates the erection or is it the case with some of these treatments that um sounds like blood flow is almost um autonomous right well I think a lot of these um yeah the blood flow is not adequate and that's why we're having to you know sort of go beyond but generally as you point out there's different stimulation whether it be you know visual tactile or factory um that sort of starts that Cascade that releases neurotransmitters in the penis that leads to this phase of dilation you know naturally and men get erections a few years I was reading about um vasopress inhalence you know there was a bunch of stuff hitting the market um by the way I don't suggest that people um get experimental with this stuff you know as a neuroscientist who also um knows the thing about neuropeptides and neuro hormones that can impact the hypothalamus you know I just I I just cover my eyes and kind of um cringe when I think about people inhaling vas oppress and thinking oh yeah you know there's a study that is oppress and increases sexual desire or something like that um but nowadays I'm reading a lot more about a really interesting peptide um treatment which I think is a FDA approved prescription drug which is um relates to uh a um melanocyte stimulating hormone that comes out of the medial pituitary um that is used to increase sexual desire it's prescribed for women um but men are starting to take it um and it seems to have at least from what you read on the internet um a pretty profound impact on libido and on erectile frequency and persistence um is this something that you know it's you're using in your clinic um uh yeah what about these peptides that people are inhaling and injecting and some of them are taken in oral form but most often I think it's nasal inhalent or um uh or it's uh a subcutaneous injection yeah so um those are not ones that that we use in clinic but I think you know looking at sort of just sexual dysfunction broadly there are a lot of things that you know we do try and help um and one of the things sort of that I kind of relates to that that is it's been a proposed treatment for it is this concept of delayed orgasm or delayed ejaculation so I think everybody's familiar with premature ejaculation right where men ejaculate too quickly um but on the other end of the spectrum there's men that takes you know a long time to ejaculate and you know what that is is sort of defined differently but generally most people would say like sort of two standard deviations above average on average probably around 5 minutes or so two standard deviations would be kind of 20 to 25 minutes so for men that take that long to ejaculate that would be considered delayed or sometimes they don't ejaculate every time that they you know have relations so for those I think there is a need for treatment because there's no FDA proof therapy for that um and so that's why I think you know providers are trying some of these other you know more experimental things um there's some that we use just not that one in particular um there's also some devices that have been trial as well but it's it's a challenge because you know I certainly you really feel for these men um it's one of the pleasures in life um and some of them are never able to have sex or only or sorry never able to orgasm and some are only able to do it very rarely so we do want to offer them benefit what about pelvic floor Health more generally um the topic of pelvic floor health is something that comes up more often around female reproductive health and Urology um you hear about Keel Kagel kull I don't know I guess we'll have to ask him because it turns out keigle Kel was a person um who named the exercise after himself um whether or not he did them or not I do not know but um my understanding is that Kagel are a pelvic floor strengthening exercise um and my understanding is that some people experience urinary or sexual dysfunction because of a overly relaxed AKA weak pelvic floor but that some people have the exact same problems because of a hypercontracted AKA overly tense tight strong pelvic floor meaning don't run out and start doing Kagel just because you heard about them they're not good for everybody they might be bad for certain people but what about pelvic floor health I mean should men be paying attention to pelvic floor Health should men be doing pelvic floor exercises I mean I think it's really key that you say that because you know not everything you hear about is good and I think it's not good for the right person so there are certainly men that I see that have very you know just a lot of tension a lot of anxiety sometimes these men you know urinate every hour I mean there's other things and you can just tell they're just sort of very wound up and I think for that man you know one of the issues you kind of allude to is he probably needs to relax more so you know pelvic floor Physical Therapy can still benefit you because there are some just different feedback exercises that could be done to help with relaxation so you know any urologist office there's usually a list a lot of different providers around the region that can help with some of these um keegle exercises though can be useful you know for example for um like prostate cancer Rehabilitation some of these men where we're trying to kind of rebuild some of the strength or maintain or improve continence in these men we do want to strengthen some of these muscles so that they can sort of recreate or replace what was lost when the prostate was removed so I think for the right man they can be useful but yeah it could be a dangerous tool in the wrong hands and you mentioned that if people want to learn more about pelvic floor therapy um they can contact their local urologist and find a good pelvic floor good male pelvic floor specialist do they tend to specialize male female they're usually uh pretty much gender or sex agnostic so they usually are able to help all and um forgive me for uh asking for an Abridged Anatomy lesson here but um could you describe the pelvic floor muscles and how they relate to the bladder prostate urethras anatomy that you talked about before because I have the picture of the bladder urethro prostate penis in my brain um I know um my uh life experience where the testes and scrotom are relative to all of that but now I'm trying to figure out um how like so the pelvic floor a bunch of muscles that that are attached to the pelvis but how do they interact with those uh with those organs yeah good question so they sit beneath you know the sort of in the perineum so the area between the scrotum and the anus and Beyond too so they basically support all the structures there they support you know the base of the penis the prostates the bladder the rectum uh and you know they're they kind of keep M you know adequate tension to keep all those structures up they relax when you know different functions are necessary they're very important for ejaculation um you know some people think that they kind of trigger some of the orgasmic response as well um you know sometimes men will have you know pain in that area in the perinal area can transmit to other parts of the body like the scrotum you know one of the one cause of scrotal pain and there can be many can we pelvic flooor dysfunction so I think you know again pelvic floor therapy can be useful for sort of a constellation of symptoms against some urinary symptoms as well so I think for some patients it can be helpful but um you know again there if if you get things too tense um that can sometimes be harmful so presumably these pelvic floor therapists also help people achieve a more relaxed pelvic floor if that's what they need exactly got it going to some of the questions that um came back to me when I I solicited for questions and anticipation of this episode um several not a few um let's say a couple dozen people asked about split urine stream is that a signature of prostate overgrowth is that a a urethal issue is it perfectly normal um I'm assuming here they mean a split stream of urine that doesn't unify at any point they're talking about a consistently split urine stream and for those of you that don't know what I'm talking about we're talking about a urine stream that's actually two urine streams and we're assuming one urethal opening because I hit the literature on this and um there is a case of of failure to fully fuse the urethral duct during development where people some I'm assuming small fraction of males have a ureal opening on the base of the penis and at the tip of the penis let's rule that out as a as a possibility for now um but now that it's on the table what percentage of males have that uh twoyear rethal openings so well hypospadius which you're describing where the the actual meatus is not at the tip but it's kind of along the proximal urethra or you know even further down sometimes in the scrotum probably about 1% of births um and usually it's recognized at Birth and oftentimes it's surgically corrected because it's better to repair it early rather than later okay so ruling that out um what is the cause of split urine dream and is it um a signature of a larger issue you know one of the reasons that we you know urinate sort of um from an evolutionary standpoint right is to you know basically deposit in sort of a convenient time our waste and we don't want to get it everywhere because we don't want to sort of label ourselves um with smell of urine because that'll be easier for predators to to be able to identify so just similar to today we'd like everything to get in the toilet without creating a mess so anytime there's turbulent flow um it it certainly could signal an issue so it could be like a urethal issue as you're pointing out a prostatic issue inadequate speed you know of getting the urine out the meatus so you definitely should see you know a physician to get evaluated because there's likely some issue that could be improved the most popular question I received from males however was about perhaps no surprise penis length you're an expert in this actually um not just because you're a urologist male reproductive health expert but um you published a study recently on the changing Trends in penile length um tell us about that study I have so many questions about um the methodology because um I have to assume this didn't involve self report right those were excluded yeah yeah so um lying was excluded um being fous here but um yeah how was this study done I mean pretty incredible study um and the results are I don't know if they're surprising or not I I first I thought oh this is surprising but the results were only surprising in light of what you were talking about earlier about sperm and testosterone levels I think um I'll let you describe the study now rather than than giving people the punchline here yeah so I mean the origin was that we were looking at we wanted to know average lengths for another project that we were doing and you know going down the rabbit hole this has been reported for decades you know there's different reasons that people have reported P length you know sometimes they do it uh just on volunteers again to sort of get the average lengths of different populations sometimes it's done pre and pro- surgically to try and understand what changes would occur um so we just sort of called the literature found data on 55,000 men all over the world um and wanted to see if there was a you know sort of a Time pattern with that and similar to your hypothesis we assumed based on all the other data that we would likely see a decline you know whether it be you know chemical environmental exposure but if nothing else if we're getting bigger you know the functional penile length should decline because you know the super pubic fat pad will get a little bit bigger and so we'll kind of lose penile length with that and so much to our surprise the super pric F pad excuse me um being the pad of fat directly over the penis right right and so you know if that gets bigger that'll necessarily compromise penal length but you know as you alluded to what we found is actually the opposite that um that penises were getting getting longer with time so how it's measured measured differently so one of our inclusion criteria was that all the study had have measured sort of in an office sort of in a clinical setting so whether it be a you know a clinician or whether it be a researcher that actually did it so there's different ways you can measure a penis you can just do a stretch length so you kind of stretch it up as much as you can and then use sort of a ruler to measure how long it is again from as deep as you can get you know the pubic bone ideally up to the tip of the the glands or the okay guys so here's what he's describing he's talking about measuring from the top not from the bottom believe or not people ask questions about this um my daughter made that joke actually oh yeah yeah yeah uh measuring from the top not from the bottom no cheating um you're talking about stretching the penis while it's flaccid presumably and then measuring from essentially contact with the a location that's contact with the pubic bone to the the tip right okay so that that length was recorded in 50,000 men mhm wow yeah so that was one and then we also looked at ere length and so there's different ways that an erection can be achieved of in a clinical setting so one is you could ask a man to stimulate himself and then measure so that was some of the studies and then the other method as we've alluded to earlier is you could inject a man with a medicine to give him an erection and then measure it and did 50,000 men participate in that aspect of the study it was less no that was I think that was about probably 10 to 15, men I have to wonder whether or not it's easy or difficult for people to recruit subjects for these studies I don't know I could see it going both ways yeah some of the studies actually had a tremend mendous number had about um like 15,000 men some individual studies contributed that and actually interesting after we published it there were some men that volunteered uh for the next study to be measured I'm sure you'll hear from some of them after this episode um what was the major finding so the major finding we wanted to do is just give normative data we found that it varied around the world So based on different regions um the average lengths you know varied a little bit but generally on average um erect penis is probably between about 5 to six in somewhere in that neighborhood so that was kind of the take-home we want that was the average the average for rec length did you publish the full distribution uh we didn't I think we were we're we're our plan was actually to make a follow on study so we could show everybody you know I guess probably they were interested where they kind of fell on the graph but it was fairly you know it was normally distributed yeah I would think that um despite the um you know the wide availability of pornography that um that the distributions like the plots of all the data uh would be interesting to men um for the same reason that the testosterone by function of age data published as a scatter plot in that textbook I referred to earlier right were interesting because um the scatter plot distributions I feel like um point to um other takeaways that one can be in their 70s and have testosterone levels equivalent to a male in healthy male in his 30s that one can be in their 30s and have testosterone levels that are twice as much or half as much as as AG match cohort this kind of thing um I think there there's value in that so um what what other takeaways um uh arrived with the data from the the penis length study that perhaps we didn't we didn't hear about like what what did you find most interesting about about the data well that there was any change over time you know this was a fairly short uh study was probably about you know 30 years or so um but we did find that penile length has been increasing over time so um you know that was just sort of fascinating that we would see sort of in such a short interval of time that there would be a change number one but that we wouldd see a lengthening number two so you know again similar to the concerns that arose for these you know relatively short period of time where you would see changes in seman quality um you know it suggests something sinister right it's unlikely to be a genetic change because that would take you know centuries probably uh certainly several Generations so the fact that this happened so quickly um was just surprising um this brings to mind some of work that I was involved in years ago um when I was a master student I studied um early organizing effects of hormones on uh the brain and body and um I'm sure this has been updated um since then but um my recollection is that uh during embryonic development males um are exposed to a certain amount of dihydrotestosterone not testosterone but dihydrotestosterone which organizes the brain male as they used to say now the the verbiage around that would probably be a little bit different but the idea is that um males are born um with penile tissue of course but then it's during puberty that the same hormone dihydrotestosterone then exerts an activating effects on the genitals and the genitals grow during puberty penis length increases so assuming that the study that you did was on males um post puberty right I'm assuming it was um then it would imply that something's changing about the levels or the signaling related to dihydro testosterone um how could that happen um do we have any ideas about what might be happening I mean this is the opposite of environmental endocrine disruptors preventing sperm from being as you know high quality and numerous as they could be or from you know or environmental factors either in utero or post utero um suppressing testosterone levels here we're talking about the opposite effect we're talking about dihydro testosterone levels presumably being higher in males over the last 30 years and thereby longer penises right so I mean I think there's different conjectures that you could make about why this could happen I mean it could be you know maybe endocrine disrupting chemicals you know in utero some early exposure you know that some of the mothers had to kind of androgenic effects during the male programming window that may have led to some longer lengths um another hypo hypothesis we had is that if if males are going through puberty earlier the earlier one goes through puberty the longer length tends to be so maybe that provides sort of this link so earlier puberty tends to be longer potentially means longer duration exposure to dihydrotestosterone longer penises right yeah you may be surprised to know to know you might not be surprised to know that there is a uh subculture online I know because they contacted me in anticipation of this episode um of um post puberal males who take a combination of dihydrotestosterone and low levels of growth hormone in efforts to try and increase their penile length and the the um ones taking dihydrotestosterone they're not taking pure dhg they're taking things like oxandrolone um which very closely mimics the structure of DHT um they report um some success um fortunately they did not send me pictures um otherwise I would have just forwarded them to you for your next study um but this stuff is happening um in post puberal males so um it it all rests on this dihydrotestosterone hypothesis um I don't know just a point of Interest yeah I don't know it just physiologically it doesn't make sense why that would work as you're pointing out post pubertally and then unless they're doing other things you know some sort of stretching exercises or call joking but yeah it I would not recommend that thank you that was the response I was looking for so um that Community will be listening with um uh open ears don't do it as long as we're talking about DHT dihydrotestosterone um it's only fair to discuss the drugs that many people take to suppress dihydro testosterone in hopes to keep or grow their hair things like finasteride dutasteride um some maybe many not all people who take these drugs particularly in oral form experience um sexual dysfunction issues um and other issues related to suppressing DHT that said my understanding is that these drugs are also quite useful maybe even life-saving in some cases for um staving off certain forms of prostate cancer what are your thoughts about fide toride do you see people coming into your clinic who are having sexual dysfunction or types of issues because of their hair or attempt to maintain or grow their hair issues and um equally important is that we talk about so-called postfastr syndrome I got a lot of questions about post finasteride syndrome um because I'll describe it in a couple of minutes um it sounds pretty devastating for these people's lives um and I'll explain why it's so devastating for them um in a moment but yeah what about finasteride dutasteride and these drugs that are effectively DHT block ERS um DHT levels if they get too high indeed can miniaturize the hair follicle cause people to lose their hair typically up front or in the back so-called crown or whatever you know widows PE uh uh uh or everywhere some cases um it also induces hair growth on the back beard growth as we understand but then people go and take these drugs to try and maintain or grow their hair and often times they have erectile dysfunction or other issues is that surprising to you you know I think the men that see these um these side effects are are tend to be you know younger men in their 20s 30s and 40s uh and they take it as you're pointing out for hair loss so before it was FDA approved for that indication at least finasteride was you know they did randomized control trials to look um and one of the other things that we'll talk about too is just reproductive effects so they did you know lots of studies to see if there were changes in cement quality you know for men on finasteride versus the placebo and there were some very subtle changes but you know sort of in post marketing now we see these patients in clinic um you know everybody to enroll in these studies had normal function so I think that's sort of important to understand and obviously that's not life right that people come in with sort of different baselines and different amounts of reserve and so we now know that there's probably people that are a lot more sensitive to these medications and others and so there are some men that drop their sperm counts dramatically and usually if we're we stop these medications their sperm couns can recover you know usually a spermatogenic cycle is probably about 2 to three months so usually in maybe 3 to six months we usually see recovery for most men um but similarly for you know sexual function I certainly you know have a number of patients you know that do complain of low libido erectile function this post finasteride syndrome um you know and the mechanisms I think are less certain because you know measuring testosterone levels which we do you know sometimes if androgens are low or even if androgens seem to be in the maybe normal range or low normal range we'll try and increase testosterone through a variety of means testosterone chopine sometimes will give you know it helps some but not all so I think the exact mechanism of what is going on here what is changing I think um you know we need more you know more understanding about the exact sort of path of physiology um neur you know or neurochemically it seems like a pretty serious trade-off to either maintain to grow hair or lose sexual function I mean I talked about DHT and some of these um side effects of faside dutasteride on um previous episodes and you know I'm not a clinician but my encouragement is always for people to approach these drugs with a with a real level of seriousness if not caution um the post finasteride syndrome was described in these online questions as seemingly permanent even though um people had ceased to take finasteride or dutasteride so in other words they were taking this stuff they I don't know how they felt while they were on it but they stopped taking it and the sexual dysfunction issues um don't seem to be resolving um does that mean they should go see uh you or another uh male urologist reproductive health specialist yeah I mean oftentimes they do for you know these complaints um you know they start to notice it when they're on the medication then when they you know usually through online research kind of learn about this potential entity sometimes they discontinue now some men do have resolution when they stop but there is this permanence in some handful of men um you know they've done you know MRI imaging to try and understand sort of you know more anatomically or fun what exactly is going on I think there's still a lot of unknowns about it but it can be you know permanent for some so they come in you know and they see me in clinic erectile dysfunction low libido and then we go down all the the host of treatments that we talked about and evaluations that we talked about again we have resolution in some but there are some that seem treatment refractory yikes that's my only response I mean permanent effects uh on Sexual Health in it as a consequence of an attempt to maintain one's hair I mean this is where you know um in all seriousness it it it just sounds like something that um people need to think very seriously about because it as I understand there's nothing that can predict whether or not someone will have post finasteride syndrome right right um and I did um a bit of reading on this uh within the scientific journals as well there isn't a lot of information as you point out because it's a fairly recent phenomenon and that highlights a different issue this may be the first time in history where young males are taking finasteride and dutasteride and that might be the cause of the post finasteride syndrome right I think you you alluded to this earlier right these drugs have proven to be very beneficial for older men treating prostate issues exactly yeah right so this is a post finasterid syndrome um I think falls under the category of medical conditions that um you know a few years ago we we would hear the same about um chronic fatigue syndrome even fibromyalgia not long was considered one of these oh is it all a psychosomatic issue now we we now clearly know that's not the case for fibromyalgia by the way um but I can recall a time not that long ago when people um in the medical profession kind of like well yeah this I don't know if this is a real thing but post finasterid syndrome sounds certainly real for the people that are suffering from it exactly yeah yeah okay well the reason I'm spending so much time on this is that um I get a lot of questions about it and there clearly a lot of young males who take finast rid or do tast Rider are thinking of doing that um for cosmetic reasons and I think they should be aware of the potentially serious consequences yeah agree yeah but you did say earlier that if someone has a penis you can get it hard so um so all is not lost even for these post finasterid syndrome individual good okay we'll hold you that um you mentioned chopine um could you explain what chopine is and what it's used for um because again uh we want this discussion to be centered around the real science the real medicine um but there is a growing kind of subcommunity of people out there who are saying okay testosterone therapy can cause us these sperm um suppressive issues and perhaps some other issues um but doing nothing might not be an option for somebody who wants to increase their whatever libido other aspects of of um Androgen function um and so there are a growing number of people out there who are taking chopine only in order to presumably increase testosterone but my understanding is that it would impact the estrogen pathway as well yeah what's chopine uh what are your thoughts about people using chopine um sort of off label um simply to increase androgens seems sketchy to me for reasons related to changes in neural circuits um but you'll tell us how it works well thank you for including the off Lael disclosure anytime I talk about this I always have to say say that but F so chopine is a selective estrogen receptor modulator so basically it blocks estrogen and so from our earlier discussions of how the pituitary works you know there's sort of an elaborate feedback loop between the pituitary and the gonads and the man the testes and so what happens is you know FSH LH these genotropin stimulate the testicle to make sperm and testosterone testosterone's peripherally converted to estrogen and that feeds back on the hypothalamus to stop that so again you don't get an over production so by blocking the estrogen receptor the level the pituitary or the hypothalamus you'll stop that and so the idea behind blocking that is that you'll get more production of FSH LH more of these drivers so you get more testosterone you get a higher stimulation of the testicle you know the hope is that for fertility that sometimes it can improve sperm production too and there's some limited data that can help um but I think as you're alluding to it's sort of a way to just augment your body's own production of testosterone so it certainly does that I think there's no question that testosterone levels do rise I think that the reason that doesn't always help is because not every problem is solved by testosterone we kind of talked about somewhat in this uh this discussion but also that you know you do need some estrogenic signaling as well and so by blocking that you know even partially because there's also some partial Agonist effects of chopine as well it may limit it um and you know it turns out that estrogen signal is important for a lot of things is important for you know bone health but sexual health too it's important for libido so that may be partially blunting some of the hope for benefits of testosterone I found that men tend to be happier on testosterone than some of these other forms and that could be a possible explanation um but one of the advantage of chopine if we are thinking about this as a treatment for low testosterone hyperism is that it doesn't have the same toxic effects on sperm production so by maintaining the body's own production of testosterone by maintaining production of FSH LH we'll continue to get sperm production so for this reproductive age man that has low testosterone and symptomatic low testosterone you know low to you know low energy level sex drive mood sleep problems uh it can be a worthwhile treatment and it it does help a lot of men um but not everybody I've always been curious why if the goal is to increase sperm production that the most common treatment is HCG human chonic gonadotropin because as you mentioned earlier luteinizing hormone and FSH follicle stimulating hormone um are deployed from the pit and travel to the testes where they stimulate um testosterone production and sperm production but it's the FSH specifically that encourages sperm production so why wouldn't um a man who's taking maybe testosterone therapy or who perhaps just wants increased sperm caltin quality take FSH instead of human chonic G atropin which is more or less a proxy for luteinizing hormone that's a really good question and so what FSH does like said is it simulates sperm production so it seems like it'd be a much more logical treatment and actually in randomized Placebo control trials it does do that so one of the Reas it does do that it does help okay so it's beneficial and we should we should give it more but one of the reasons that we don't is cost so it's rarely covered by insurance and HCG a month of that is in the hundreds of dollars so let's say like $300 to $500 but a month of sort of therapeutic FSH is probably $2 to $3,000 so that cost is really limiting it takes two to three months to make a sperm so um you know men often have to be would have to be on it for several months but there is reasonable data that would help and it does make you know a lot more sense that that should be given as Aden therapy with testosterone rather than HCG um but HCG does work you know sort of everyone's surprised it does actually help um but yeah I agree there is sort of a contradiction there so if the price came down it doesn't you know this is another off Lael medication for that indication um it would be it could be worthwhile one hormone that we haven't discussed is Pro prolactin um I'm familiar with prolactin from a variety of perspectives but um I always think of uh dopamine and prolactin is kind of a seesaw relationship dopamine's up prolactin is down you know dopamine is elevated with sexual desire sexual activity post ejaculation prolactin goes up sets perhaps the refractory period on erection ejaculation for some period of time and then dopamine comes back up but you know this kind of thing and I realize that's far too simplistic that prolactin is doing many things in the brain and body besides that but how often do you see hyperprolactinemia um I don't know if plural Pras is uh is clinically correct but um elevated levels of prolactin that are causing problems um for men um what are some of the telltale signs of that um and this I'd like to use as a segue to talking about um some of the sexual dysfunction that is commonly discussed around the use of ssris and other other drugs to treat depression and and mental health issues that sometimes create um endocrine and or sexual health issues yeah so prolactin um is sometimes it's a diagnosis hyperprolactinemia it's a diagnosis make not that many times I would say you know less than 1% of the patients that we see will end up having that but usually it's a handful of times a year because you know we we see a lot of patients um typically the The Telltale sort of symptoms would be you know ones of low testosterone that's a common one but you know in my practice I see it a lot with men with very low sperm production so I've diagnosed several prolactin secreting tumors and the manifestation of that was you know they weren't getting pregnant we checked a sperm count it was very low you know that mandates a check of testosterone which is also very low and then that leads to a prolactin which is very high and then that that was diagnosed so it's something I think to be aware of but I don't know that there's not usually a lot of symptoms and sort of going to a clinician when you're having sexual dysfunction symptoms low testost or fertility problems will usually you know be able to diagnose it if it's present are there any other hormones in the um in the galaxy of sexual health related hormones that uh fall into uh you know Common clinical practice uh for you um I check estrogen as well so I think that's another one it's again because of the relationship with obesity I think that can be important sometimes there's too much aromatization and so sometimes uh that can be a problem I think you just like we talked about normal estrogen signaling is important I think too much can be bad so there are some men where we do see manifestations that it can manifest as gynecomastia in some cases male breast tissue male breast tissue yeah as I was um told um what was it that the uh male breast tissue is sort of like um the appendix it's there but it's not very interesting that's right yeah everybody has some and we just don't want the growth to get out of control could you tell us about one of the world's most difficult to pronounce words which is veric yes so verical it's a very common condition probably about 15% of all men have it and it's a very common cause of infertility if you look at all the ideologies it can be 30 to 40% so basically what it is is dilated veins in the scrotum um so obviously we need veins to get blood out of the testicles uh but sometimes they can be a little larger than average and there's sort of a normal sort of thermal regulation so if the veins get too big it's thought to warm up the testicle the other thought is that it doesn't adequately clear some of the metabolites um so exact the pathophysiology is you know somewhat debated but I think those probably contribute um and it's something that everybody should be evaluated for if you're concerned about fertility um so again we see it very commonly you know given the fact that a lot of men have it about one in seven men have it it doesn't always cause a problem but maybe about 20 to 25% of the time it does so men will manifest with low sperm counts we see sometimes discomfort you know ache you know worse at the end of the day then at the beginning orse of the activity anytime blood can pull sometimes it stretches and some men feel that and then kids sometimes it can lead to um either stunted testicular growth or shrinkage of the testicle um it's also thought to be a progressive lesion so the longer a man has it the more damage it can do it usually manifests around puberty in general um so it's not a concern for everybody but I think certainly if couples are having difficulty conceiving you're having discomfort in the area and you have one it's a discussion you should have what about Pon disease yes so ponis is a scarring of the penis which leads to curvature or deformity so the way erections work is everything swells and you can imagine if there's a scar tissue it doesn't swell symmetrically so you'll get like a curvature deviation sometimes you can get an hourglass or sort of a banding um if you look it up on the internet you can see you know a host of different deformities that men get it probably present about 5 to 10% of men so it's very common um sometimes it could be from injury you know from you know a like a penal fracture other you know sort of less severe form of injury to the penis sometimes men have described hitting it on different things potentially that could could lead to it sometimes it can manifest after um prostate cancer surgery or other kind of surgeries which can you know sort of stun the penis or you know injure some of the nerves of the penis um so that's another condition we see commonly um you know obviously it can lead to bother you know and erections are not straight that can just you know cause um you know psychologic bothered a men it can also physically make it difficult for a man to have sex you know um sometimes it can limit certain positions so that's another common complaint we see um I think it's something that men should be aware of there's now awareness campaigns now that there's an FDA approved medicine for it collagenase or zlex which is a medicine that disolves scar tissue um so that's one of the treatments we have for it there's also you know different devices sort of stretching devices where we try and just mechanically remodel the penis to allow it to be a little bit straighter um and then there's also surgical options too so there's a lot we can do I always tell men again as long as we have a penis we can make it we can make it hard but we can also make it straight I'm wondering why in the study about penis length uh testicular size and volume wasn't also measured and and that's something that we haven't discussed um what is the relationship between testicular size and volume um and some of the other parameters we've been talking about and maybe this is also a good time to highlight um any kind of um morphological signals that uh would warrant people coming to the clinic so asymmetry in testical size for instance um changes in testicular size um obviously a psize lump uh they taught us in uh High School is um a warning sign of potential testicular tumor or cancer um yeah we didn't really talk about testicles yeah so I think that yeah kind of being aware you know the average size of um a testicle for a man is about you know sort of about a walnut so it's about 16 to 20 CC's um you usually if you're going to measure it it'd be about four to four and a half centimeters and longest axis to give you know your listeners or viewers some idea um if it changes certainly let people know if you feel anything let people know although um our uh you know National guidelines on screening practices recommends against regular testicular self-exams interestingly because I think the concern is that it leads to more anxiety than cancers that it diagnosed but I think you know I always tell men no one knows your scrotum better than you so if you identify you know a problem you should bring it to attention so you know the classic appearance or the way that a test cancer would manifest is a firm painless mass that you kind of feel coming from the testicle um I find it interesting that um at least as I understand women are encouraged to do regular self- exams of their breasts for for lumps so but you're telling me that men are actually discouraged from doing regular exams of their testicles for lumps could be cancer that feels like a um unfair asymmetry it does I mean Cancer I mean both both seem very important um oh yeah well I think there's no question obviously I'm very biased yeah I was trying to say it so you didn't have to right oh yeah I don't want to get in trouble with the US I don't want anyone to get cancer I mean I so um I don't even want a dog to get cancer um so I'm surprised that they discourage self- exam um but is it because men are getting it wrong they're coming into the clinic thinking they have testicular cancer and then most of the time they don't I think that's the concern that you know the number of cancers that are diagnosed versus the false you know um the false you know lumps that they identify just lead to more anxiety and end up not actually you know causing more harm than good I think is the concern but um yeah it was a surprising recommendation when it came down usually patients ask about it I certainly don't discourage them from doing these exams and I have we've certainly identified cancers through that means before well I saw the episode of er where the guy was having trouble breathing when he was an elite Runner and it turned out he had testicular cancer and he had overlooked the lump on his testicle so I'm going to continue to self screen okay fair enough numerous times today we've talked about the potential benefit of getting a blood test for hormone profiles lipid profiles and other things as well as a sperm analysis um my understanding is that one can only do that if they have the disposable income to elect to do that through some commercial online service um but is there any way that um patients who have insurance can uh approach their physician in a way that this would be covered by Insurance um I don't want to get you into any trouble here but I you know it's it's always such a shame it is such a shame when we're talking about something that is really um per pervasively related to health as is sexual health reproductive health and people are not aware of a potential problem in the present or in the future that could have been mitigated simply because they didn't get a blood test or do something as simple as a um a sperm analysis um so we can't be presumptuous and saying oh well you know two $200 or $1,000 is no big deal I mean for a lot of people that's a huge deal right um it's prohibitive um for many people so how can people get this stuff assessed um should they talk to their primary care physician should they um call A urologist what's the best approach yeah I think both are good strategies I think you know insurance is becoming a lot more open to covering some infertility at least testing sometimes treatment as well so I think a lot of insurance does cover that now you know sometimes we check Sean analyses for other Jacory issues um but I think that you know again as more of this data gets out I think as more recognition how important the mail is I think we'll get um sort of more buying and coverage obviously women have you know the automatic feedback of obory Cycles so they kind of know and if there's a problem they can bring that to the attention but men don't have that feedback without some of these testing yeah and we probably should have mentioned this earlier so forgive me I I this was on me to mention that when we talk about sperm quality and we sort of shifted back and forth to semen quality it's possible to have um normal seamen volume and have very low sperm count right we're not talking about the total amount of ejaculate per se we're talking about the density of forwardly motile healthy non-dna fragmented sperm in that at seen right so in other words it's not sufficient to just um assume because uh you can ejaculate that your sperm are healthy that's exactly right yeah I mean I think you know about 15% of men have low semen quality whether it be concentration movement shape about 1% of men have no sperm in the ejaculate and that's something sometimes they have no idea about so the only way to know would be to actually do a formal test well I'm encouraging people um to get these parameters assessed and I'm making that statement um because it's very clear based on everything that you've told us today that sperm quality and hormone levels are just oh so important um not just for sexual health um but for urinary health and for reflecting prostate health and other aspects of whole body health and and um Sexual Health relates um directly to mental health right we we didn't talk so much about the psychogenic issues but um the two go hand inand exam I wanted thank you so much for coming here today and sharing so much knowledge with us I mean these really are the issues that um males think about and wonder about and um have questions about um and they do so to varying degrees depending on where they're at in life um but I think especially for younger men who are hearing this um who are not at the point where they want to conceive um it's really important to start thinking about these issues for all all the reasons you mentioned I think these issues are really important um for women to know about as well just as it's important for men to understand uh female reproductive health and and uh to not just improve communication but this after all um is at the heart of the uh the presence and proliferation of our species so thanks for taking care of the male half and um uh and thanks for doing the work you do it's incredible um the large scale studies the the more detailed the studies the uh on smaller populations the you ask the questions that it seems um uh many people are just uh afraid to ask and and you get right in there and and come out with the the really rigorous data and answer so thank you so much for what you do my pleasure thank you thank you for highlighting men's reproductive Health thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Michael Eisenberg to learn more about his research and his clinical practice please check out the links in the show note captions if you're learning from Andor enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a five-star review please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests that you'd like me to consider hosting on the hubman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube I do read all the comments not during today's episode but on many previous episodes of The hubman Lab podcast we discuss supplements while supplements aren't necessary for everybody many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like enhancing sleep hormone support and improving Focus if you'd like to learn more about the supplements discussed on the hubman Lab podcast you can go to live momentus spelled o us so Liv mous.com huberman if you're not already following me on social media it's hubman lab on all social media platforms so that's Instagram Twitter now called X threads Facebook LinkedIn and on all those places I discuss science and science related tools some of which overlaps with the content of the hubman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the content on the huberman Lab podcast so again it's huberman lab on all social media platforms if you haven't already subscribed to our monthly neural network newsletter the neural network newsletter is a completely zero cost newsletter that gives you podcast summaries as well as toolkits in the form of brief PDFs we've had toolkits related to optimizing sleep to regulating dopamine deliberate cold exposure Fitness mental health learning and neuroplasticity and much more again it's completely zero cost to sign up you simply go to hubman lab.com go over to the menu tab scroll down to newsletter and Supply your email I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Michael Eisenberg and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 173 ---
Video ID: qJ3uV7coZbA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qJ3uV7coZbA
Title: AMA #12: Thoughts on Longevity Supplements (Resveratrol, NR, NMN, Etc.) & How to Improve Memory
Published: 2023-10-31 18:00:33 UTC
Description:
Welcome to a preview of the 12th Ask Me Anything (AMA) episode, part of Huberman Lab Premium.

The Huberman Lab Premium subscription was launched for two main reasons. First, it was launched in order to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast channel — which will continue to come out every Monday at zero-cost. Second, it was launched as a means to raise funds for important scientific research. A significant portion of proceeds from the Huberman Lab Premium subscription will fund human research (not animal models) selected by Dr. Huberman, with a dollar-for-dollar match from the Tiny Foundation.

If you're an existing Premium member, you can log in to access the full episode at https://hubermanlab.supercast.com. 

If you're not a member, you can join Huberman Lab Premium at https://www.hubermanlab.com/premium to enjoy exclusive content, including monthly Ask Me Anything (AMA) episodes, AMA transcripts, podcast episode transcripts, early access to live events and help advance human scientific research.

Timestamps
00:00:00 Introduction
00:01:46 Resveratrol and Longevity Supplements
00:26:49 Huberman Lab Premium

In the full AMA episode, we discuss:
- What Is Working Memory and How to Improve It

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

#HubermanLab #Science #AMA

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

The Huberman Lab podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 174 ---
Video ID: CJIXbibQ0jI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CJIXbibQ0jI
Title: Mental Health Toolkit: Tools to Bolster Your Mood & Mental Health
Published: 2023-10-30 12:00:11 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I provide science-based tools and protocols to improve mood and mental health. These tools represent key takeaways from several recently published research studies, as well as from former Huberman Lab guests Lisa Feldman Barrett, Ph.D., an expert in the science of emotions, and Paul Conti, M.D., a psychiatrist with vast clinical expertise in helping people overcome mental health challenges. I explain the first principles of self-care, which include the “Big 6” core pillars for mood and mental health. Those ensure our physiology is primed for our overall feelings of well-being. Then, I explain science-based tools to directly increase confidence, build a stronger concept of self, better understand our unconscious mind, manage stress and improve our emotional tone and processing. I also explain ways to better process negative emotions and traumas. This episode ought to be of interest to anyone wishing to improve their relationship with themselves and others, elevate their mood and mental health, and better contribute to the world in meaningful ways.

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Plunge: https://plunge.com/huberman 
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman
Waking Up: https://wakingup.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman 
Momentous: https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Articles
Day and night light exposure are associated with psychiatric disorders: an objective light study in greater than 85,000 people: https://go.nature.com/47aIZcp
Light exposure during sleep impairs cardiometabolic function: https://bit.ly/47aCNRO
Effect of self-monitoring through experience sampling on emotion differentiation in depression: https://bit.ly/46QNDMP
Emotional Granularity Increases With Intensive Ambulatory Assessment: Methodological and Individual Factors Influence How Much: https://bit.ly/4717EAa
Brief structured respiration practices enhance mood and reduce physiological arousal: https://bit.ly/3tKojcM
Cardiac vagal control as a marker of emotion regulation in healthy adults: A review: https://bit.ly/46PCQCO

Huberman Lab Episodes & Resources Mentioned
Dr. Lisa Feldman Barrett: How to Understand Emotions: https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/dr-lisa-feldman-barrett-how-to-understand-emotions 
Guest Series | Dr. Paul Conti: How to Understand & Assess Your Mental Health: https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/guest-series-dr-paul-conti-how-to-understand-and-assess-your-mental-health 
The Iceberg Model: https://bit.ly/46GNOdH
Guest Series | Dr. Andy Galpin: How to Assess & Improve All Aspects of Your Fitness: https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/dr-andy-galpin-how-to-assess-improve-all-aspects-of-your-fitness 
Fitness Toolkit: Protocol & Tools to Optimize Physical Health: https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/fitness-toolkit-protocol-and-tools-to-optimize-physical-health 
Foundational Fitness Protocol: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter/foundational-fitness-protocol 
Dr. Layne Norton: The Science of Eating for Health, Fat Loss & Lean Muscle: https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/dr-layne-norton-the-science-of-eating-for-health-fat-loss-and-lean-muscle 
Dr. Alia Crum: Science of Mindsets for Health & Performance: https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/dr-alia-crum-science-of-mindsets-for-health-performance

Other Resources
Seasonal Affective Disorder (SAD) lamp: https://amzn.to/3FCgKYk
Drawing tablet: https://amzn.to/3FzKfdm 
The Physiological Sigh: https://youtu.be/rBdhqBGqiMc  
Paul Conti, M.D.: How to heal from trauma and break the cycle of shame (The Drive episode): https://peterattiamd.com/paulconti3
"Trauma: The Invisible Epidemic: How Trauma Works and How We Can Heal From It": https://amzn.to/3GVLHXw 

Timestamps
00:00:00 Mood & Mental Health Toolkit
00:03:10 Sponsors: Plunge, Eight Sleep & Waking Up
00:05:35 First Principles of Self-Care & 6 Pillars of Mental Health
00:13:58 Pillar #1: Sleep & Sleep Routine
00:18:00 Pillar #2: Light, Sunlight
00:24:38 Tool: Nighttime Environment & Darkness
00:28:33 Pillar #3: Movement; Pillar #4: Nutrition
00:33:18 Sponsor: AG1
00:34:51 Pillar #5: Social Connection
00:40:00 Pillar #6: Stress Control; Physiological Sigh
00:45:40 Tool: Raise Stress Threshold, Deliberate Cold Exposure
00:50:00 6 Pillars & Brain Predictability, Affect & Emotion
00:57:58 Pharmacology, Psychedelics, Supplements & Neuroplasticity
01:06:25 Sponsor: InsideTracker
01:07:26 Tool: Emotional Granularity
01:14:39 Tool: Heart Rate Variability & Emotional Graduality; Physiological Sigh
01:23:49 Tool: Unconscious Mind
01:26:54 Tool: Self-Concept, Self-Narrative Exercise
01:34:34 Tool: Unconscious Mind & Dream Analysis; Liminal States
01:42:52 Tool: Journaling; Generative Drive
01:52:43 Tool: Processing Trauma
02:00:43 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, YouTube Feedback, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

#HubermanLab #MentalHealth

Disclaimer: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford school of medicine today we are discussing tools for mood and mental health I will include tools and resources taken from the guest episode that I did with Dr Lisa Feldman Barrett who is a psychologist and neuroscientist whose laboratory focuses on mood and emotion during that episode she mentioned several important tools that I do believe everybody should apply and that indeed I've been applying to my own life and have found to be extremely beneficial I will also highlight some of the specific research articles those tools are based on which were not covered in the podcast with Lisa I will also discuss tools glean from the four episode series that I did on Mental Health with Dr Paul kti who is a medical doctor specializing in Psychiatry and that episode as some of you may already know focused on mental health and the self as well as relationships and it included a deep discussion of what is the self we talked about the unconscious mind and the conscious mind and we also covered a lot of tools for understanding oneself both within the context of therapy but also within the context of things that one can do alone and that require zero cost in addition we talked about tools for improving relationships we talked about first principles of self-care so I will provide highlights and takeaways of those tools during today's episode and thirdly I will include tools what we often refer to as protocols gleaned from some recent Publications indeed Publications that came out as recently as two weeks ago which really emphasize specific things that we can all do that again are zero cost that have been shown in quality peer-reviewed research to significantly improve mood and mental health for instance if you're a regular listener of this podcast you are probably familiar with my nearly constant reminder that people should view morning sunlight and afternoon sunlight and if you can't to embrace some Alternatives like looking at bright artificial light although sunlight is best well there was a recent paper published in the journal Nature mental health an excellent Journal focusing on not just the positive effects of viewing light at those times of day and indeed throughout the day but also the independent and positive effects of being in darkness for 6 to 8 hours every night that's right not only is light during the day correlated with significantly improved mental health outcomes but Darkness at night that is avoiding lights not just bright lights but lights for up to eight hours at certain periods of your 24-hour circadian cycle has been correlated with improved mental health outcomes and indeed has been shown to significantly offset certain negative mental health outcomes this is a spectacular study again it involved a enormous number of research subjects more than 85,000 research subjects and it touches on a large number of actionable protocols that I've distilled down to just one or two things that all of us can easily do to improve our mood and mental health on a consistent basis before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is Plunge plunge makes what I believe is the most versatile at home self-cooling cold plunge for deliberate cold exposure I've covered the topic of deliberate cold exposure several times on this podcast indeed we did an entire episode about deliberate cold exposure and what's very clear from the research literature is that deliberate cold exposure can induce dramatic positive shifts in so-called catac colomines that is dopamine norepinephrine and epinephrine this is a small collection of molecules that are released in the brain and body body when we do deliberate cold exposure and that subjectively lead to greatly enhanced feelings of mood alertness and focus for many hours afterwards that's perhaps the best substantiated reason and the most popular reason why people who get into deliberate cold exposure no pun intended continue to do deliberate cold exposure on a consistent basis plunge uses a powerful and very easy to use cooling filtration and sanitation unit to give you access to deliberate cold exposure in clean water whenever you want I've used a plunge for several years now and I really like it because first of all it can use a standard outlet you don't have to modify the electricity in your home or yard and it's very easy to clean in fact it stays clean for long periods of time which makes it very easy to maintain as well plunge has several different models to select from including their new all-in cold plunge which offers faster cooling smartphone connectivity and more if you're interested in getting a plunge you can go to plunge spelled p l u n g.com huberman to to get $150 off your cold plunge again that's plunge. comom huberman to get $150 off today's episode is also brought To Us by eight sleep eight sleep makes Smart mattress covers with cooling Heating and sleep tracking capacity I've spoken many times before in this podcast about the fact that sleep that is getting enough quality sleep on a consistent basis is the foundation of mental health physical health and performance now one of the key things to getting the best possible night sleep is to control the temperature of your sleeping environment and that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep your body temperature needs to drop by about 1 to 3° and in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized your body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3° with eight sleep controlling the temperature of your sleeping environment is made extremely easy eight Sleep mattress covers allow you to program the temperature of your sleeping environment at the beginning middle and end of your night it can even divide the temperature on the two sides of the bed for different people it also has sleep tracking capacity it will tell you how much slow wave sleep and rapid eye movement sleep you're getting and really help you you dial in the exact parameters so you can get the best possible night sleep I've been sleeping on an eight sleep mattress cover for well over 2 years now and it has significantly improved my sleep and therefore my daytime mood focus and alertness if you'd like to try eight sleep you can go to eights sleep.com huberman and save up to $150 off their pod three covers eight sleep currently ships in the USA Canada UK select countries in the EU and Australia again that's 8sleep.com huberman today's episode is also brought To Us by waking up waking up is a meditation app that includes hundreds of meditation programs mindfulness trainings yoga NRA sessions and nsdr non-sleep deep rest protocols I started using the waking up app a few years ago because even though I've been doing regular meditation since my teens and I started doing Yoga Nidra about a decade ago my dad mentioned to me that he had found an app turned out to be the waking up app which could teach you meditations of different durations and that had a lot of different types of meditations to play place the brain and body into different states and that he liked it very much so I gave the waking up app a try and I too found it to be extremely useful because sometimes I only have a few minutes to meditate other times I have longer to meditate and indeed I love the fact that I can explore different types of meditation to bring about different levels of understanding about Consciousness but also to place my brain and body into lots of different kinds of States depending on which meditation I do I also love that the waking up app has lots of different types of Yoga Nidra sessions for those of you don't know Yoga Nidra is a process of lying very still but keeping an active mind it's very different than most meditations and there's excellent scientific data to show that yoganidra and something similar to it called non-sleep deep rest or nstr can greatly restore levels of cognitive and physical energy even with just a short 10minute session if you'd like to try the waking up app you can go to waking up.com huberman and access a free 30-day trial again that's waking up.com huberman to access a free 30-day trial okay let's talk about tools for improving mood and mental health I think it goes without saying that these are extremely important topics for everyone not just to know about but in my opinion also for people to implement and the reason is that we are currently in a worldwide Mental Health crisis and while we could debate the reason why we are in a worldwide Mental Health crisis it's very very clear that mood disorders and challenges with mental health about found and of course there are many different therapies for the treatment of mood disorders and mental health everything from talk therapy with a psychologist or psychiatrist or social worker prescription drug treatments there nutritional approaches sematic approaches and I want to be clear that I do believe that there's value in all of these approaches what tends to matter in terms of what sorts of tools and approaches one adopts includes both access so whether or not people have access to these type of therapies whether or not they can afford them on a consistent basis and also of course the severity of the mood or mental health disorder and I'd be remiss of course if I didn't make the statement and I don't say this just to protect me I also say this to protect all of you and those that you know that if you are concerned about yourself or somebody else having a serious mood or mental health disorder please do seek out help from a licensed clinical psychologist or psychiatrist or other healthc care professional who's qualified to help you in that regard with that said we can now have a discussion about tools and protocols for enhancing mood and mental health that truly appli to everybody regardless of age to start off I want to talk about a fundamental aspect of mood and mental health enhancement that was discussed both in the guest episode with Dr Lisa Feldman Barrett as well as in the guest series with Dr Paul Ki and that has to do with what Dr Paul Ki referred to as the first principles of self-care or mental health the first principles of self-care include but are not limited to taking excellent care of one's biology which of course includes both the mind and the body and in order to make this very simple and actionable I've distilled out what I refer to as the big six I've sometimes refer to these as the six major pillars of Health both mental health and physical health as well as performance for that matter but if we're going to talk about tools for mood and mental health we absolutely can't discard discussions about our biology that is we need to make sure that we're taking care of our normal biological function and indeed enhancing the production of specific neurotransmitters and neuromodulators that we are optimizing yes I use the word optimizing the function of our so-called autonomic nervous system that aspect of our nervous system that's humming in the background all the time it's operating unconsciously to regulate our sleep wake Cycles it's regulating how well or poorly we react to things it's regulating how much dopamine serotonin epinephrine acetylcholine we were producing all of this stuff is humming in the background and sets the stage for all the conscious work that we might put to for instance trying to understand what our life narrative is what our unconscious mind is doing what sorts of defenses it might producing all of the sort of high level and directed work that we're going to talk about a little bit later exists on a background of autonomic function of neurotransmitter production of hormone production not just testosterone and estrogen but things like cortisol prolactin and on and on so it's important to understand that if our goal is to be in the best possible mood given our life circumstances and to have the best possible mental health given our life circumstances and to improve our mood and mental health consistently over time that we have to pay attention to what I'm referring to here as the big six or the six pillars of mental health and those are just to list them off then I'll go into a little bit more detail sleep Sun sunlight although I'd like to modify sunlight because based on some new data that just came out a couple of weeks ago I'd like to now make that second pillar not sunlight but light SL dark so we could even just think about it as light when and how much light you get but what you'll soon learn is that how much dark you get is also extremely important so we've got sleep light movement is the third nutrition social connection and Stress Control now these are topics that I've spoken about extensively on previous huin Lab podcast episodes so I don't want to go into a deep dive of each of these six pillars right now but I am going to just give you a few highlights of each and then of course we will provide links in the show note captions for which you can go on the Deep dive if you like and I also would like to mention that if you ever have questions about specific protocols or tools and you're seeking those out or previous episodes or specific timestamps of previous episodes of this podcast you can go to our newly revamped hubman lab.com webbsite and put any topic of Interest or even several topics of Interest into the search function and it will take you to the very specific timestamps and other resources that provide information on those topics so I'm going to go into a few of the key bullet points about each of the six pillars or what I also refer to as the big six of self-care and mental health again this is a necessary list but is not sufficient again necessary to do these things every 24 hours hours indeed every 24 hours if you want to have the best possible mood and mental health but it is not sufficient that means you still need to do some of the other things that we're going to talk about in terms of directed approaches at improving mood and mental health if you are to quote unquote optimize your mood and mental health or if you are let's just say trying to constantly improve your mood and mental health but these are the necessary but not sufficient pillars of mental health so Under The Heading of sleep it's safe to say that most people need between 6 to 8 hours of sleep per night some people can get away with five some people need as much as nine or 10 certainly Growing Kids babies teenagers and those that are suffering from some sort of illness are going to need more as much as 9 10 maybe even 12 hours of sleep per night however most people do well to get somewhere between six and8 hours of sleep per night you're just going to have to experiment and figure out what's best for you now one thing I heard recently so I can't claim this as an original idea but that I think is a really good way to think about sleep is that sleep much like physical fitness is something that we have to constantly be working on it's not the sort of thing where you can get a great night's sleep one night and then the next night just kind of let all the protocols go and expect to get a great night's sleep you don't have to be neurotic about getting a great night's sleep indeed I do believe that we should strive to get enough quality sleep as many of the nights of our life as possible and if you can't do do that hopefully it's for good reasons but of course things happen in life raising kids you have emergencies all nighters to study so you can make sure you get that best possible grade on exam etc etc but we should all strive to get the best quality sleep that we can and as much of it most nights of our lives so it's important to look at sleep as a process that you're going to be working on for the rest of your life just like Fitness and I don't say that to overwhelm you I say that so that if On Any Given night you get a poor night's sleep you don't stress that too much you just get back on the wagon and you try and get the best possible night sleep the next night and the next night and the next night much like Fitness there's no 10-week program that's going to transform your physical fitness forever okay just like there's no sleep program that's going to transform your sleep forever it's a daily or rather I should say nightly investment although some of the things that are going to positively impact your sleep or perhaps damage your sleep are things that you do during the daytime right so avoid that caffeine too late in the day get that morning sunlight and on and on but if you sleep sleep is something that you're constantly investing in and it is a critical investment for your mood and mental health the other thing that's not often discussed and I really haven't talked about terribly much on this podcast is the importance of having a fairly consistent sleep routine now I realize that not everybody can get to sleep at the exact same time each night and wake up at the exact same time each morning and frankly that's not practical I certainly don't do that however what we know from the Circadian Health literature is that everybody strive again that strive nobody's perfect but strive to get to sleep at more or less the same time each night and wake up at more or less the same time each morning this turns out to be really important for regulating mood and mental health and indeed for improving your overall levels of sleep getting the optimal amounts of slow wave sleep AK deep sleep and rapid eye movement sleep and what we know is that ideally you're going to get to sleep within plus or minus 1 hour of your regular sleep time so if your regular to bed time is 10:00 you're used to getting in bed at 10:00 and falling asleep somewhere around 10:30 well then if the next night you fall asleep at 9:30 great you're still within the plus or minus one hour and if the next night you go to sleep and you don't fall asleep till 11:30 don't sweat it in fact you're still within that plus or minus one hour however if you start getting into a habit of going to bed at vastly different times deviating more than or less than one hour from your normal to bedtime well then you're going to start to run into issues such as as waking up feeling groggy even if you got enough sleep so even if you slept the full eight hours that you're used to getting people who go to sleep much later than they normally do or much earlier than they normally do start getting into kind of issues of mood regulation energy regulation not just in the morning but in the afternoon likewise try and wake up at more or less the same time each morning plus or minus one hour that's really going to help you anchor your overall sleep schedule and it's really going to help lead to predictability of your overall levels of energy mood and focus throughout the day the second pillar in that big six is light and I used to refer to this as sunlight right I'd say and I'm going to say it again now although I've covered this in a lot more detail so again just hitting the top Contour critical elements try to view sunlight that is with your eyes view sunlight as early as possible after waking whenever I say that the most common question I get is what do I do if I wake up before the sun comes out well unless you have superpowers that I'm not aware of you can't make the sun come out any earlier so just flip on artificial lights as needed until the sun comes out and then get outside face East in the morning take off those sunglasses it's perfectly safe to look at low solar angle sunlight without sunglasses providing you're not you know driving into bright light and you crash this kind of thing get outside look at the sunlight definitely blink to protect your eyes as needed but get that sunlight in your eyes early in the day this has Myriad positive effects on mood focus and alertness and nighttime sleep later that night and it does so through a number of well-defined biological and endocrine hormonal Pathways that I've discussed on many previous podcast episodes and you want to do this for about 10 minutes on non- overcast days and as long as 20 or 30 minutes on overcast days and that highlights the second most common question I get which is what do I do if there's no sun where I live I live in an area where there's no sunlight look if you live on planet Earth there's always sunlight there might not be very much of it it might be very overcast where you live it might seem very dark but trust me there's far more photons light energy coming through that cloud cover even in the darkest mornings of winter than there are at night in those dark Winters so get that light in your eyes and do it as consistently as possible and also do that in the late afternoon and evening that's critical for regulating your circadian clock for reasons that I've talked about previously but I'll get into in a future podcast really explaining how those clock oscillators and mechanisms work but just to keep it really simple since this this is a toolkit episode for mood and mental health your mood and your mental health will benefit tremendously from getting morning sunlight in your eyes now if you need to get more light in your eyes because indeed there's just not enough sunlight or you don't have the opportunity to get outside and view sunlight in the morning for whatever reason you might invest in getting a bright light source that you can plug in you probably want one that's as bright as 10,000 lucks so that's pretty bright those fall under the category of so-called sad lamps sad Seasonal effective disorder lamps and you can purchase those they can be somewhat expensive you can also opt to get a 900 Lu drawing tablet by the way I have no Financial relationship to any of these sorts of light sources but you can find them pretty easily and in the case of the 900 Lux light tablet um fairly inexpensively online and you can put that on your desk or where you have your morning coffee and try and enhance the total amount of light that you're getting in the morning but frankly nothing is as good as sunlight so if you can't get sunlight you might think about investing in one of those sad lamps and indeed those sad lamps aren't as good as sunlight but they are the next best thing if you really can't get sunlight on a consistent basis a few other fine points that I always get asked about first of all it is absolutely okay to wear eyeglasses or contact lenses those sorts of corrective lenses are actually going to focus the light to your retina which is where you want it however this whole process of viewing morning sunlight and afternoon light does not again does not work through a window or windshield because windows and windshields filter out the relevant wavelengths of light that you want to get directly onto your retina okay so that's the reality of it in addition please don't feel that you have to look directly at the Sun and certainly don't stare at the Sun never force yourself to look at any light sunlight or otherwise that's so bright that it's painful to look at so if it's comfortable for you to look directly at the Sun and just blink every once in a while and you can do that without any pain or discomfort or watering of the eyes please do that you're getting a lot of photons into your eyes and they're transmitting that to your brein brain and your brain to the rest of your body and on and on however if you find it uncomfortable to look directly at the sun in that case what you'll want to do is offset your gaze to you know 10 or 20 degrees which is nerd speak for just a little bit to the right or a little bit to the left and get the sunlight into your eyes indirectly okay and I often also get asked well can I stand in the shade while I do this what if I have an overhang in my apartment the best thing is of course going to be to face directly to the Sun and look either directly at it or slightly offset but if you can only get morning sunlight by going out onto your balcony and your balcony doesn't face East rather it faces West you'll still get a lot of photons from the Sun Reaching Your Eyes there but ideally you would find some way to look toward the sun first thing in the morning I realize that with kids and work and other obligations this can be challenging but it is a challenge worth meeting meaning don't lose your job or forget to take care of your kids to do this but you can bring your kids to do this and indeed you should it sets their circadian rhythms also so and people often will ask well does it work on dogs you know and indeed dogs and other animals have these exact same circuits and Pathways for setting their circadian rhythm so it's great for them too now there are also clear and documented benefits for mood and mental health to getting bright light in your eyes ideally from sunlight throughout the day as much as you safely can please don't get sunburned don't get cataracts by getting too much sunlight but getting outdoors and getting sunlight in your eyes during your lunch break or a walk here and there or if you have to remain indoors during the day getting the lights in that environment as bright as possible as safely possible I should say is known to improve mood and mental health why well because there's a special so-called opsin within the cells of your eyes it's called melanopsin that doesn't respond to the same differences in color that are present in sunlight in the morning and the evening but rather responds to the overall brightness of light so very bright lights either from artificial sources or ideally from sunlight activate these cells and these cells project these little wires we call axons into specific parts of the brain that improve your mood and feelings of well-being so I can't give you a specific number you know of five minutes a day or 10 minutes a day just get as much light in your eyes ideally from sunlight throughout the day as is safe for you meaning where you're not getting sunburned and you're not damaging your retina and if you want to know if you're damaging your retina well anytime you have to Blink or turn away from light because it's really bright that's a signal that the light is too bright so while you want to place yourself into bright environments you don't want to place yourself into any environment so bright that it's painful to be in okay so use that as a metric and you should be just fine and the last point about light for mood and mental health is a relatively recent theme that's emerging from the scientific literature and that really was driven home by a recent study that I mentioned a little bit earlier in the episode this is the study publish in nature mental health showing that Darkness during a particular stage of your 24-hour cycle your so-called circadian rhythm is also very beneficial for mood and mental health and it's beneficial for mood and mental health in a way that is independent from light and from sleep now what do I mean by that okay well there are a number of different ways that this can be examined but in this particular study which I like oh so much entitled day and night light exposure are associated with psychiatric disorders an objective light study in more than 85,000 people what the researchers did is they analyzed how much light and or dark people were getting across the 24-hour cycle and correlated that with mental health outcomes looking at a range of different mental health challenges including bipolar disorder schizophrenia depression PTSD and much more and I'll go into this study in a lot of detail in a future episode because it's such an important study with so many gems withinin it that we should all know about but one of the key things from this study is that the positive effects of daytime sunlight exposure and the positive effects of nighttime dark exposure that means of course the absence of light are independent of one another put differently making sure that you are in very dim to completely dark environments for a continuous 6 to8 hours within every 24-hour circadian cycle is correlated with much better mental health outcomes in other words we shouldn't just think about the presence of light in the morning and throughout the day as positive for mental health that's all true it's absolutely true and this study further verifies that but that's been known for some time indeed decades from the scientific research and of course it's been known for thousands of years intuitively and subjectively without detailed scientific measurement but in addition to that this study shows that people who stay in very dim to dark environments for eight hours every 24 hours or I should say approximately eight hours in every 24-hour cycle they benefit from improved mood and mental health outcomes in a way that's independent of how much light they're getting and independent of how much sleep they are getting the point is this the time when you wake up consider that time zero and then about again you don't have to be super strict about this about 16 to 24 hours after that wakeup time you should be in a very dim to dark environment for that 16-hour to 24-Hour period after wake up okay what do I mean by this I mean if you go to sleep at 10: p.m. and you wake up at 6:00 a.m. well that 10: p.m. to 6:00 a.m. phase of your circadian cycle you should be in very dim light or entirely dark environment this is a great opportunity to reference another study which is published in the proceeds of the National Academy of Sciences which shows that even having a small amount of light in the room which isn't even that bright while you're sleeping with eyes closed can disrupt morning glucose levels so in other words keep your sleeping environment dark keep your nighttime environment dim to the best of your abilities right certainly go out to dinner every once in a while go to the movies go out and have a party enjoy yourself if you have to go to the hospital God forbid or you have to tend to some emergency do that but to the extent that you can control it within the confines of life and its demands keep your nighttime environment dim or dark because that independently of any sunlight and other bright light that you're viewing during the daytime and afternoon is going to positively improve your mood and mental health now moving on to the other pillars and these I'm going to move through a bit more quickly than I have the previous two because we've done entire series on these or I should say serieses serieses is that how you pronounce it someone put the plural of serieses in the show in the comments on YouTube the third pillar is movement and when I say movement I mean exercise as you all know we should all strive to get anywhere from 180 to 220 minutes of Zone 2 cardio per week that's movement that allows you to hold a conversation but where you to do it more intensely or even a bit more intensely you wouldn't be able to hold that conversation in addition we should do some V2 Max work we should get our heart rate very high at least once a week doing some sort of movement that's safe for you so that could be running or cycling or swimming or Pilates whatever it is for you getting your heart rate way way up is also important and to do that at least once a week but daily movement either cardiovascular training or resistance training and it's very very clear that we need both maybe not on the same days in fact I split them to separate days resistance training done for anywhere from six to 10 sets per muscle group either close to or to failure this could be with weights it could be with bands it could be with machines all of that was covered in detail in the podcast series that I did with Dr Andy Galpin an exercise physiologist who's expert in all those areas I also did an episode on a foundational Fitness protocol that has been distilled into a very simple three-page PDF that you can get for completely zero cost by going to hu lab.com and just put foundational Fitness protocol PDF and you'll be taken to that toolkit so all of the details of a weekly exercise routine that involves daily movement but also certainly in my case includes at least one full day of rest per week because many people do indeed need one maybe even two full days of rest per week so that highlights the third pillar movement but we know that cardiovascular training and resistance training aren't just great for our body they also improve mood and mental health that's so very clear from the research literature so we can't Overlook those in a conversation about mood and mental health now the fourth pillar is nutrition and nutrition is a big topic it's a very barbed wire topic if you get involved in this stuff online you know you you've got your people who believe that you know carnivore is better than vegan you have the people who believe vegan is better than carnivore most people are omnivores you have your seed oil debates and on and on and on we're not going to touch any of that now indeed if you want to learn more about nutrition and what works and what doesn't work for sake of aesthetic changes weight loss muscle gain Etc I would refer you to the guest episode that we did with Dr Lane Norton you can find that again at huberman lab.com where we do a deep dive on all the variations in different nutritional protocols but suffice to say that regardless of whether or not you're vegan omnivore carnivore or keto or whatever everybody needs to consume sufficient amounts but not excess amounts of quality calories per day now you may do that by intermittent fasting you may do that by a more traditional meal scheduling but everybody's going to need to do that because your body and brain and indeed the parts of your body and brain that translate to mood and mental health require macronutrients proteins fats and carbohydrates as well as micronutrients so the key takeaway with nutrition is to make it quality nutrition within the bounds of whatever sort of nutritional program that you're following and that means getting most of your food sources from either nonprocessed or minimally processed foods so these would be foods that you're going to need to prepare or foods that would perish um over time these are not the sorts of foods that live in boxes and cans and other uh packages that would allow them to live on the shelves forever and ever okay and as I say that I know many people are shouting well what about rice you know rice can live on the shelf for a long time and yes okay I consider rice a minimally processed food because of course it can live on the shelf for a long period of time and here I'm just going to back out of the whole conversation about nutrition at this point because as you can probably tell it's a deep series of rabbit holes that we can fall into and really get distracted the point is make sure you're getting enough food don't overeat we know energy toxicity is a problem for not just body composition but for mental health so you want to get enough calories but not too few calories and you want to make sure that you're getting them from quality sources and I say that because of course food is not just the substrate for the cellular repair and indeed production of tissues in your body but it's also the substrate for all the sorts of neurotransmitters right which are derived from amino acid precursors that are derived from food right all of that dopamine stuff and serotonin stuff is derived from amino acids that come from food sources so the link between nutrition and mental health should now be an obvious one as we all know quality nutrition influences of course our physical health but also our mental health and our cognitive functioning our memory our ability to learn new things and to focus and we know that one of the most important features of highquality nutrition is making sure that we get enough vitamins and minerals from high quality unprocessed or minimally processed sources as well as enough probiotics and prebiotics and fiber to support basically all the cellular functions in our body including the gut microbiome now I like most everybody try to get optimal nutrition from Whole Foods ideally mostly from minimally processed or non-processed Foods however one of the challenges that I and so many other people face is getting enough servings of high quality fruits and vegetables per day as well as fiber and probiotics that often accompany those fruits and vegetables that's why way back in 2012 long before I ever had a podcast I started drinking ag1 and so I'm delighted that ag1 is sponsoring the huberman Lab podcast the reason I started taking ag1 and the reason I still drink ag1 once or twice a day is that it provides all of my foundational nutritional needs that is it provides insurance that I get the proper amounts of those vitamins minerals probiotics and fiber to ensure optimal mental health physical health and performance if you'd like to try ag1 you can go to drink a1.com huberman to claim a special offer they're giving away five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 again that's drink a1.com huberman to claim that special offer the fifth pillar in the big six is social connection and we're going to talk a little bit more about this later in the episode but let's let's just be very brief and specific about this we all need to strive to limit the number of social interactions that we feel tax or even Vex us that cause us stress this is something that was covered in depth in the episode with Dr Lisa Feldman Barrett where she talked about the fact that we don't just have a nervous system that regulates itself through experience and through our thoughts and our actions we are as a species interacting with other nervous systems both of our own species other humans as well as non-human species dogs and cats and if you have them horses and other animals so we need to think about our nervous system as being both regulated from the inside and through our own actions and choices and thoughts but also through interaction with other nervous systems and while we don't always have as much control over Which social interactions or work interactions we have to engage in we should really strive to understand and indeed pay some serious attention to whether or not certain types of social interactions are what she referred to as net savings neutral or taxing right certain types of social interactions with certain people or groups of people just make us feel taxed it makes us feel stressed it leads to negative affect that is not good feelings or emotions and often elevated levels of autonomic arousal that leave us ruminating and leave us having challenges with sleep we really should all strive to limit those interactions to the extent that we can on the reverse side of that as Lisa Felman Barrett so beautifully pointed out we also have the capability to regulate each other's nervous systems in ways that produce savings that is that allow us to feel and indeed cause physiological changes that make us feel not just happier not just relaxed not just happy because we enjoy interacting with somebody but or a group but that give us a savings that give us the kind of resources literally metabolic and neurochemical resources that make us feel more capable and give us a sense of elevated mood and improved mental health when we are not engaging with those people and this is highly subjective of course but you should be able to distinguish in fact I encourage you to spend a little bit of time maybe even just five or 10 minutes thinking about you know who are the individuals and groups that I interact with that leave me feeling taxed you know that really seem to drain my energy and have me ruminating and in a not good space when I leave whatever interaction I had with them this could be a real interaction or online interaction indeed I did this the other day based on Lisa's suggestion I found it to be tremendously useful what I did is I decided to and by the way this was happening on a run where I was thinking you know a lot of my mind is in a conversation with people that aren't even here I was sort of working through a conversation I was thinking about what I would say what I did say what they said in an interaction that unfortunately was pretty unpleasant it wasn't extremely unpleasant but it was pretty unpleasant and I realized okay that that is a sort of interaction that I would like to avoid in the future because it wasn't happening right then but it was carried forward into a portion of my day my morning run that for me is normally very pleasureful and quite sacred to me actually so paying some attention to how much of your internal dialogue is with yourself versus with others and how much of that is positive or negative is extremely beneficial and I'm not talking about always just thinking about oneself and not thinking about others to the contrary we also need to think as Lisa pointed out about who are the people with whom we interact with or observe that lead us to have ongoing dialogue with them in our mind or think about those interactions in ways that give us energy that lead to energetic savings literally metabolic savings that we can apply not just in those interactions but in our work Endeavors and our solo Endeavors whatever that we're doing when we are away from those people so while this concept of savings or neutral or taxation of our metabolic and our neurochemical systems might seem a little bit squishy it is not squishy this is a neurobiological concept it's also a psychological concept and it's one that I'm so glad that Lisa brought up because social connection social interaction is so vital to our mood and mental health but oftentimes we hear social connection we think oh that means we have to spend a lot of time with friends we have to organize dinner parties well sure that's all fine and good if you can do that and I do of course encourage people to spend time with those that they love but it's also important to take a step back and just think a bit maybe even write out a bit you know who are the groups and sorts of individuals and interactions that really tax you who are the people you find kind of neutral and what are the individuals and groups that really provide what Lisa referred to as savings that is they tap into the metabolic and neurochemical Pathways that lead us to have improved mood and mental health not just during those interactions but away from those interactions as well and often pervasively and extremely positively so so it this is no small de this is a really important aspect of our mental health now the sixth pillar in the big six is stress control and the reason it's included is that look stress is going to happen life is filled with so-called stressors and for a good number of years in fact the last 15 years there's been a lot of debate in the field of Psychology and Neuroscience as well whether or not stress is good for us whether or not stress is bad for us whether or not we simply need to reframe stress as good or bad and to some extent all of that is true you know we know that chronic stress is not good for our memory our immune system or our health we also know that if you understand the reality which is that stress also allows us to harness our mental and physical resources to perform better than we would otherwise in certain circumstances and that provided we can get to sleep each night that perhaps stress isn't so bad and perhaps is even performance enhancing I talked about this in the guest episode with Dr Ali Crumb from the psychology department at Stanford and I've talked about this in other podcasts as well and I'm not here to tell you that stress is good for you I'm not here to tell you that stress is bad for you what I am going to tell you is that it is extremely important that we all have readily accessible Stress Management tools that work the first time and every time and these fall into two categories the first category are realtime tools so tools that you can use to reduce your level of stress in real time and the best way that I'm aware of that's grounded in excellent physiology and Neuroscience to reduce your stress in real time is the so-called physiological side I did not invent this pattern of breathing it's not breath work per se this is a pattern of breathing that we all naturally do in our sleep to restore carbon dioxide and oxygen levels to their proper ratios we also do it periodically throughout the day without noticing indeed we have a defined or specific neural circuit in our brain that extends to our diaphragm and communicates with aspects of our heart Etc that allow physiological size to calm us down faster at least in my knowledge than any other directed protocol and the physiological sigh as many of you know is very simple and straightforward anyone can do this you simply do a big inhale through your nose try and maximize the inflation of your lungs and then before you exhale sneak in another brief inhalation even if it's just a tiny micro inhalation to maximally inflate the lungs and that has an important effect on the little Sachs in the lungs called the avioli of the lungs it's going to open up whatever avioli we collapsed in there and then you're going to do a long extended exhale through the mouth and typically just one although sometimes it requires two or three but just one physiological sigh is effective in bringing down one's level of stress significantly enough that you don't need to do it again so this can be done essentially anywhere and by anyone I suppose probably couldn't do it if you were underwater or certainly don't do it if you're underwater but otherwise it's a very safe and very effective way to calm down and reduce your levels of stress in real time maybe before public speaking or in whatever circumstance you feel you need to calm down in real time so I'll demonstrate the physiological side for you here I've done this many times before in previous episodes but for those of you that haven't heard or seen those episodes I feel obligated to do it again now okay so it's a deep inhale through the nose followed by another brief inhale through the nose and then a long exhale through the mouth and before you start asking questions about what do I do if I have a deviated septum can it be just through the mouth do the first two through the nose do the third through the mouth so it's like this and indeed I feel calmer and indeed if you do it you will feel calmer you'll notice that second inhale through the nose was kind of sharp in the sense that I had to really push um put some physical effort into making it happen and you know my shoulders jolted upwards if you just listening to this and not watching my shoulders jolted upwards that second inhale through the nose is important for a variety of reasons I've talked about elsewhere so the physiological sigh is going to be the go-to protocol for you again not invented by me this is not huberman breathing this is a pattern of breathing discovered in the 1930s by physiologists it's hardwired into our nervous system and that's what makes it so great it works the first time and it works every time so that's to my knowledge the best way to control your stress in real time now why is that important for mood and mental health well as we'll talk about later if you want to access your so-called generative drive a theme that we're going to get into in a bit more detail this is something that came up during the series with Dr Paul kti you will learn that stress and anger and negative emotions while they can be very motivating very arousing they are not going to be good for your long-term mood and mental health period so having tools to regulate your stress and your levels of anger your levels of reactivity and also to elevate your feelings of agency and control over your life starting with agency and control over your physiology your internal state is going to be vital and what I love about the physiological sigh is that of course it's completely zero cost but also there's a dedicated circuit in your brain and body for this particular pattern of breathing we do it spontaneously but you can do it intentionally and it works just as well if not better to regulate your levels of stress that is to bring them down which has outsize positive effects on your mood and mental health not just in the moment but also should improve your confidence that when stress comes because the world is filled with stressors it's not if it's when when stress comes that you will have a physiologically scientifically supported tool to deal with and reduce that stress now in addition I do believe it's important for sake of mood and mental health to also have a tool or a protocol to raise your stress threshold that is to increase your capacity to deal with life stressors without them feeling so stressful and there are a number of different ways to do this but they all center around elevating your levels of adrenaline epinephrine and norepinephrine nor adrenaline those are the same thing just they have multiple names forgive me I didn't give the same two things four names so don't blame me blame the other scientists that did it the point is there are several ways that you can self-induce elevations of noradrenaline and adrenaline and then to learn to Anchor your mind and your thinking to stay calm in the elevated adrenaline States as a practice for when stressors hit you in the outside world and your adrenaline and noradrenaline Spike now one of the best ways to do this because it works the first time and every time and is also zero cost in fact it will save you money is to put yourself in a cold shower or other deliberate cold exposure environment but most everyone has access to a cold shower not everyone but most people and of course by turning off the heat you're going to reduce Heating cost right your water bill so getting into a cold shower for a minute or so to elevate your levels of adrenaline and learning to either use your breathing you could do physiological size or to distract yourself or whatever tools and approaches you need to be able to stay calm while you have elevated levels of adrenaline in your body and the reason deliberate cold exposure works so well to do this is that it is pretty non-negotiable even if you really love cold showers or cold plunges or things that sort you're still going to get that elevated adrenaline and noradrenaline it's pretty much non-negotiable you know for the first 10 or 15 seconds that you get into a cold plunge or a cold shower you should fully expect yourself to feel stress and for your breathing to accelerate and then your goal is to try and anchor or control your breathing in that stressful environment the reason for doing this is that it's a practice it's a practice that's going to translate to a better ability to manage your internal State and therefore your thinking your cognition and your ability to make good decisions under stress it's not about becoming Untouched by stress it's about being able to better navigate stress indeed I think of this as analogous to driving in fog something that I had to learn to do because I grew up in the Bay Area and it can be very foggy there sometimes and of course you don't learn to drive in fog the first day you learn how to drive but the first time you hit heavy fog driving where you can only see one reflector in front of you at a time it is truly stressful right you don't know if you're going to come up on another vehicle in an instant which of course can happen so you have to adjust a number of things you have to learn how to do that and while I would never elect to drive in fog learning to drive in fog teaches you how to be comfortable driving in different weather environments same thing with driving in a rain Stormer for you East Coasters from the Northeast learning how to drive in a snowstorm you would never elect to do that but once you do it a few times you feel more comfortable in those extreme conditions so that's really what raising your stress threshold is all about of course do it safely do it under conditions in which you're not going to get hurt or anyone else will get hurt but learning how to do this can be extremely beneficial and of course deliberate cold exposure isn't the only way but frankly it's the most reliable way and it's the most versatile way to do that because you can do it in your shower or in a cold Plunge at home so you can practice these things again Safety First always make sure you're not exposing yourself to cold to the extent that you're going to damage yourself mentally or physically but it's a great practice and you could probably think of other ways to spike your adrenaline that was safe and of course life will spike your adrenaline so you can also use real life as your uh you know your stress inoculation tool and we all have to do that anyway what I'm suggesting is that you adopt a real-time tool physiological size and that you adopt at least one offline tool that you do anywhere from one to three maybe seven days a week but at least one day a week that you put yourself into a cold shower deliberate cold exposure not for sake of increasing metabolism or anything else but really just to learn how to calm yourself and maintain clear cognition when stress hits because indeed stress is going to hit so that's the big six for improving mood and mental health and the big six apply that is they are the Cornerstone for mood and mental health regardless of who you are regardless of your age regardless of whether or not you're dealing with an acute or a severe mood or mental health disorder or you find yourself to be reasonably healthy with respect to mood and mental health and you simply want your mood and mental health to be stable and or improve over time time now the reason why the big six those six pillars are so important for mood and mental health and indeed form a critical component of what Dr Paul kti referred to as the first principles of self-care is that those six pillars establish a millu that is an environment of neurochemicals including neuromodulators such as dopamine serotonin epinephrine norepinephrine acetylcholine and other neurochemicals as well as well as hormones to testosterone estrogen prolactin cortisol and immune molecules and on and on that lead to a high degree of predictability in your brain and nervous system now what do I mean by that why would predictability be such a key component of mood and mental health is it really just about knowing that you're going to feel energized in the early part of the day and tired at the end of the day now that might be part of it but that's not the major takeaway the major takeaway is that as Dr Lisa Feldman Barrett so aptly point pointed out your brain and indeed your entire nervous system has a couple of major jobs you know it has the job of regulating your breathing and your heart rate Etc it also has the job of regulating your thinking and your planning and your memory those are the jobs of the brain and nervous system that we normally hear about but if we think about the more macro jobs that the brain has the key function of the brain certainly the parts of the brain that are more recently evolved the ones involved in thinking and planning Etc are really involved involved in generating predictions predictions about what's going to happen next and whether or not you're going to be prepared for what's going to happen next and indeed Dr Lisa Felman Barrett also beautifully Illustrated this model of the brain as regulating a brain body budget and moods and a related topic which she called affect okay I'll explain what affect is in a moment setting the stage for being able to better predict what's going to happen next and therefore regulating your mood in the moment let's just take a moment and explore that statement in a little bit more detail essentially what she was saying and what I'm now again saying is that your brain and body go through different states your state at a given moment can be labeled as your affect your affect includes a lot of different things including levels of autonomic arousal levels of hormones levels of transmitters all of that stuff but it falls under the umbrella of affect affect essentially sets the stage for particular emotions to be more likely or less likely to emerge so emotion and affect aren't the same thing affect is a bit more General and sort of undergirds the possibility of having certain moods like feeling elated happy or sad or depressed it really sets the general stage for different types of specific emotions even highly specific emotions so in that way when you're taking care of the big six when you're tending to these six pillars on a regular basis and I should point out that we really want to tend to those six pillars every single day or every single 24 hours we really need to make those a regular investment to the extent that we can when we do that we create a neurochemical and a neural milu that allows the brain to be in a better predictive state it allows the brain to give rise to a certain aex spelled a CS so affex that lead to certain emotions being more or less likely to occur put very simply when we're tending to those six pillars on a regular basis we feel better more generally and therefore the emotions that we tend to have under different conditions even conditions of a difficult interaction with a cooworker or with a family member tend to be more positive than if we are not tending to those six pillars now in some sense that's sort of a duh statement for instance if you're sleep deprived if you're not fed well like you haven't eaten in a few hours of course you're going to be more irritable you're going to be more reactive you are going to be more emotionally labile but sleep and nutrition are just two of those six core pillars when we talk about those core pillars and the necessity for tending to them on a regular every 24-hour basis what we're really talking about is creating a millu within our brain and nervous system that allows the nervous system to do what it does best and in fact what its main job is to do which is to predict what's going to happen next because as Lisa Feldman Barrett pointed out emotions are really context dependent states that allow us to navigate not just our present circumstances but they are our nervous system and brain's best guess about the circumstances that we are soon going to encounter now I don't offer you all of that as kind of a a bunch of you know Tangled mess of nerd speak to confuse you what I'm saying is that by tending to those six core pillars you are shifting the likely aects that you will EXP exp erience and therefore the likely emotions that you'll experience so you're biasing your whole system towards more positive affect and more positive emotions regardless of what your life circumstances happen to be and the stressors that you encounter and indeed you also are including that six pillar of stress control so when those stressors arrive you will be better able to navigate them now this view of emotion regulation of mood and mental health is certainly not a novel concept people have talked about the physiological regulation of mood from the time of William James and even earlier you know it's been a long-standing question for instance or debate in Psychology and philosophy you know do we feel anxiety in our body and then label it as anxiety or do we feel anxiety in our mind and then our body follows that's been a long-standing debate and frankly there's evidence on both sides which leads me to the conclusion I think most neurobiologists and psychologists to the conclusion that those things are interrelated in a way that we can't really dissociate them completely at any level right when your heart rate goes up and you start breathing thing faster you know if I were to induce that state in you you'd probably interpret that as feeling anxious in addition to that something can make you anxious before your heart rate and breathing increases and then your heart rate and breathing increases so no need to tease those apart but if you think about the brain in large part as a prediction machine and your brain as a metabolic regulator it's trying to decide which organs need resources how much resource can I dedicate to thinking to creativity to enjoying social interaction to paying attention to what somebody else is is saying as opposed to what's going on inside my body all of those major functions of the brain as they relate to affect and emotions are going to be best supported that is biased toward positive mood positive affect positive emotions and therefore positive mental health outcomes when we're tending to those six pillars Dr Lisa feldin Barrett referred to that whole process as the brain regulating a brain body budget and she had beautiful analogies for that budget and that's what led to the description of social interactions is either generating savings or being neutral or generating a taxed feeling literally taxing that brain body budget and I love that concept and it's one that you can keep in mind and indeed we can inject a lot of specificity into this whole process of improving mood and mental health through specific protocols if you simply remember if you make a daily investment in the six core pillars you are building up that brain body budget you will have more energetic resources to spend on whatever life circumstances come your way now before we move into a discussion about protocols for how to better understand your life narrative to enhance your sense of self and confidence and things of that theme I briefly want to mention that of course there are known tools out there in the medical community and psychological Community for improving mood and mental health and while there are a variety of tools one of the main tools of the psychiatrist is prescription drugs that Target specific neuromodulator systems in the brain and body for instance SSR selective serotonin reuptake Inhibitors or atypical anti-depressants that Target the dopamine and epinephrine system such as well Butrin bryone or other types of anti-depressants or for instance nowadays there's a lot of growing excitement about clinical trials using relatively High dosages of psilocybin which by the way way closely mimics the chemical serotonin that's right psilocybin which is converted to salicin in the brain if you look at it chemically it looks very much like serotonin although it has distinct effects from serotonin I talked about psilocybin and what's being done in terms of the clinical trials safety considerations I talked about the potential Hazard considerations and where the legality and all of that is going in that episode if you want to check that out but the reason I'm taking a moment to mention these drugs things like ssris prox lat talopram Wellbutrin cybin and so on is that all of them Target specific neuromodulator systems in the brain and body and at the same time it's fairly clear that mood disorders such as major depression are not necessarily deficits in things like serotonin or dopamine they can be but most often they are not so why are such drugs prescribed for mood disorders and for mental health disorders well because if specific neuromodulators like serotonin dopamine or epinephrine are dramatically increased above Baseline that affords the brain the ability to rewire itself really the way to think about ssris or atypical anti-depressants or psilocybin for the treatment of major depression is really to think about them as chemical tools to open or access neuroplasticity and that's why it's oh so important that those drugs be combined with talk therapy where people are actively working through the sources the real life sources and the historical sources maybe even the trauma based sources of their depression and I mention this because you know there's a lot of debate nowadays as to whether or not you know these drugs are useful whether or not the side effect profiles justify their use whether or not you know they are applicable to Young populations you know there's a lot of debate about this and certainly in the case of the psychedelics there's a lot a lot of debate because this is newly emerging area and there's still not a lot of data although it's starting to you know increase over time but the key Point here is that all of these drugs have the potential to work in some people not others some people you know they simply don't work for and they cause more problems than solutions they solve but they tend to work by increasing the propensity for neuroplasticity by changing the neuromodulator milu in the brain and this is an important point when thinking about tool tools for enhancing mood and mental health that when we think about tools for enhancing mood and mental health and next of course we are going to talk about the tools that are specifically designed to Target a specific aspect of one's life story or concept of self all of that is always operating on a backdrop of two things that overall neurochemical millu and autonomic function that the six pillars relate to and support if we're tending to those but any Improvement in mood and mental health that's it's going to be significant it's going to be noticeable and it's going to be stable it's going to be pervasive over time is going to require that some degree of neural plasticity some degree of neural rewiring occur so I'm not bringing up the topic of these particular drug tools to say that they are the best way to improve mood and mental health I'm certainly not saying that they are but one way to potentially improve mood and mental health and if they are going to work they always work best when done in concert with talk therapy because they are opening the opportunity for neuroplastic icity but then that neuroplasticity has to be directed toward a particular endpoint there has to be specific work that's being done by the individual or ideally the individual with an expert trained clinically certified therapist or psychologist or psychiatrist in order to make sure that the neuroplastic changes that occur lead to long-standing improvements in mood and mental health over time indeed the drugs that I just described were originally designed as tools to to allow people to access changes within their brain that would then allow them to enhance mood and mental health but not have to rely on the drugs themselves for improved mood and mental health and along those lines I'm sure some of you out there are thinking about the supplement based or nutrition-based approaches to enhancing these neuromodulators and indeed while they don't have the same potency as things like well Butrin and ssris at increasing things like dopamine and serotonin respectively there is a growing number of people out there that are relying on say daily supplementation with anywhere from 1 to three grams with of el tyrosine you know amino acid precursor to dopamine combined with often you know 300 to 600 milligrams of alpha GPC as a way to enhance dopamine and acetylcholine and to set the stage for elevated levels of neuroplasticity but it's very important to point out that the amino acid precursors to the various neuromodulators like El tyrosine like El tryptophan so El tyrosine precursor to dopamine ELP toan precursor to serotonin and so on that those don't have the same degree of potency that is ability to enhance those neuromodulators and so the extent to which they enrich the possibility for neuroplasticity Still Remains somewhat obscure there haven't been clinical trials on that yet at least not clinical trials that I am aware of so I mention all of that stuff about drugs whether or not it's psychedelics or whether or not it's prescription anti-depressants or whether or not people are using a supplement based amino acid based protocol for increasing certain neurom modulators I feel was important to mention all of that because well first of all it's quite prominent out there certainly in the case of prescription anti-depressants and there's growing prominence and use of relatively high do psilocybin again always in done with support talk therapy this is done in the legal setting I said legal not illegal a legal setting with a board certified therapist this is being done on University campuses within research lab and of course I acknowledge that there are people who are using these compounds outside the realm of the University clinical study environment so I mention these chemicals not because I'm pointing to them as the path to improved mood and mental health they can be but they aren't always and as I mentioned before they can sometimes cause problems that lead people to wish that they hadn't taken them or to decide to not take them any further a decision that absolutely has to be made with a healthc care professional who's well certified to do that but I'm mentioning these tools because I want to understand if they work why they work and one key point that was really emphasized by Dr Paul kti who as I mentioned before is a psychiatrist so he uses pharmacology in his practice although he uses other non-pharmacologic tools as well is that these pharmacologic tools are never to be viewed as the Beall endall of enhancing mood and mental health they are but one path to improving mood and mental health and indeed should be viewed as a path to getting people who are otherwise unable to engage in those six core pillars those first principles of mental health to be able to do those things on a regular basis and then perhaps based on a discussion with their clinician these people could come off those pharmacologic agents maybe yes maybe no it depends on the individual it depends on the circumstances but those core six pillars those first principles of mental health that include but are not limited to those core six pillars are absolutely essential there's no drug that can replace those Cor six pillars I'd like to take a quick break and thank our sponsor insid tracker insid tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term Health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test a major problem with a lot of blood tests out there however is that you get information back about metabolic factors lipids and hormones and so so forth but you don't know what to do with that information with insid tracker they make it very easy because they have a personalized platform that allows you to see the levels of all those things metabolic factors lipids hormones Etc but it gives you specific directives that you can follow that relate to nutrition behavioral modifications supplements Etc that can help you bring those numbers into the ranges that are optimal for you if you'd like to try inside tracker you can go to insidetracker docomo to get 20% off any of insid tracker's plans again that's inside s tracker.com huberman okay so setting aside the core six pillars let's now talk about other tools for mood and mental health that center around really what we more typically think of when we think of mood and mental health which is emotions when Dr Lisa Felman Barrett was a guest on the podcast she said something that was really incredible and it's something that's strongly grounded in excellent scientific data which is the more specificity that we can put to labeling our emotions the better off we're going to be in terms of our overall mental health let me restate that the more specific language that we can put to our own internal emotions even if that language is just to ourselves in our own internal narrative we don't even have to speak out what those labels are the better that we're going to feel over time and indeed this effect can be quite rapid and indeed Dr Lisa Felman Barrett has done research on this very specific topic topic it's something that's referred to as emotional granularity so while some of us move through life with a sort of what I call emogif of emotions you know you got your happy face happy your sad face sad you you're angry depressed anxious you know those are labels for emotional states or you could think of them as AFF effects or emotions I think of them as emotions but they're not very specific they're pretty broad bins we say sad or depressed or super depressed or super sad anxious panic and we think of that as Nuance but it's not very nuanced and Lisa's laboratory and other Laboratories have explored two things first if people are asked to or encouraged to put more granularity more specificity on what they're feeling then it seems that their levels of emotional processing are better overall how does that translate to emotions well it translates to better overall feelings of well-being when one is placing more specificity on positive emotions and the flip side is also true so this is important to know if one places more specificity on negative emotions it also can enhance one's kind of experience of those negative emotions now that means that this is a two-sided blade all right this isn't always a good thing and if one is thinking about protocols for improving mood and mental health the data make very clear that adding more specificity to our positive emotion in terms of the language we use but also just the depth with which we process and think about those positive experiences can be very beneficial for us so there are two studies that I'd like to highlight that relate to this the first is entitled effective self-monitoring through experience sampling On Emotion differentiation in depression and the second study is entitled emotional granularity increases with intensive ambulatory assessment methodological and individual factors influence how much now each of these studies focus on something slightly different the first study was mainly focused on people who have depression and they were cued several if not many times per day to just think about and report on their emotional state and that was done in order to get people to place more granularity more specificity on what they're feeling but also simply to tap into how they're feeling on a more regular basis throughout the day the second study which is one that included Dr Lisa Felman bear as an author was slightly different because it focused on non- depressed individuals and it cued them to touch into their emotions more times per day and it also included some physiological measurements and one in particular that we're going to talk about in some detail now I don't have time to go into all the details of these studies I may do that in a future podcast episode but the key takeaways are very important for all of us to know which are first of all the more often that you can ask yourself you know what am I really feeling right now how do I feel and and this is so critical the more that you force yourself to not use broad labels or simply veilance labels veilance labels are good or okay or bad and instead understand that good is not an emotion okay is not an emotion bad is not an emotion but rather saying you know I feel you know curious but a little anxious if that happens to be the case or I feel you know bored um but you know also a little bit in positive anticipation about what's going to happen tomorrow things of that sort putting more nuance and specificity on your emotions but also touching into or thinking about your own emotional states more times per day clearly has positive outcomes for mood and mental health and the reasons for that are incredibly interesting and this is something everybody should understand why would it be that putting more specificity on what we're feeling so perhaps just in our own heads like thinking okay how do I feel right now like if I were to do that right now I'd say I feel energized and happy I do I really enjoy doing what I'm doing so I wouldn't say I'm like off the chart in awe or Elation but I'm very happy and I feel energized you know earlier today I was feeling a little bit fatigued and a little bit confused because I was trying to sort out something and it wasn't making sense to me um so assessments like that which can be told to somebody else or that we just hold internally done repeatedly throughout the day anywhere from three to six times throughout the day just periodically pinging ourselves maybe you set an alarm or maybe you just decide to every once in a while you know maybe every time you you go into an elevator or every time you go up a flight of stairs you just ask yourself yeah how do I feel right now and thinking about that for a moment and you don't have to write it down although I suppose you could it turns out that just that practice can really enhance our so-called emotional granularity that can enhance our positive emotions and affect and in addition it provides us a better sensitivity to better understand those negative emotions which sounds like it might be a bad thing but those negative emotions have information in them right this is one thing that's often lost in those broad categorizations of anxious or sad or depressed and keep in mind of course that some people are genuinely clinically depressed and that needs to be taken extremely seriously just like some people are genuinely clinically anxious and that needs to be taken seriously but most of us when we throw out the words depressed angry sad we're not using enough nuance and it doesn't really apply to our internal States or the circumstances that we're in and as a consequence we suffer it's not just about communicating our emotions we suffer because the data say that the more Nuance the more emotional granularity that we have the richer is our experience of the positive aspects of life and the more effectively we can navigate the negative aspects of life right again negative emotions perhaps isn't the best way to even describe negative emotions because that label negative implies that we should avoid it and in fact those negative emotions provide a lot of information about perhaps social interactions that we should seek to avoid in the future and so on and so forth now one of the most interesting things about this whole process of increasing emotional granularity and touching in several times per day into how we feel something that's completely zero cost takes just a moment to do that we can get much better at over over time that was clearly seen in these studies that people get much better at doing this it becomes more fasile for them very quickly is that it correlates with improvements in physiological metrics that relate to overall improvements in mood and mental health and the specific physiological metric that I'm referring to is so-called vagal tone some of you have perhaps heard of the vagus nerve it's the tenth cranial nerve it's an extensive peripheral nerve that it goes out of the brain kind at the level of the the neck uh it's one of the cranial nerves that extends um to essentially all the organs of the body the heart the lungs Etc but it's a two-way street it's a super highway of nerves out of the brain and into the body and it's a super highway of nerves back from the bodily organs to the brain and it's involved in regulating a lot of so-call autonomic function so how fast our heart rate is how fast our breathing is rates of digestion and all of that weaves together to create those things that we call aect our internal States so without going into a ton of detail about the Vagas nerve there's something that's called cardiac vagal control cardiac vagal control is the extent to which that vagus nerve can impact your heart rate and your overall feelings of calm or alertness now the simple way to think about this is more commonly referred to as heart rate variability heart rate variability is simply the distance between your heartbeats or rather the time between your Heartbeats which we know if those timings between your heartbeats are somewhat variable that is correlated with positive physical and mental health outcomes one of the ways that you can increase heart rate variability is to get regular cardiovascular exercise as well as doing resistance exercise and no surprise getting sufficient amounts of quality sleep each night is also going to be very beneficial for heart rate variability now exercise and sleep of course are wonderful but it turns out that there's also a very rapid way to increase heart rate variability by activating the vagal innervation of the heart and the way that the heart and some other circuits within the so-called brain stem interact and that's through something called respiratory sinus arhythmia respiratory sinus arhythmia can be summarized very simply by saying when you inhale you speed your heart rate up and when you exhale you slow your heart rate down and it's that exhale slowing your heart rate down that's mediated by the vagus nerve now there's a more thorough description of that which I'll just give you now and it's not that lengthy so here's how it goes when you inhale your diaphragm actually moves down and as a consequence your heart actually gets a little bigger it has a little more space as a consequence the fluid in your heart moves a little more slowly per unit volume and there's a neural signal to speed the heart up conversely when you exhale the diaphragm moves up that means there's a little less space for the heart in the general area where it's sitting so the heart gets a little bit smaller a little more compact that means that the fluid in your heart is moving more quickly through that smaller space and there's a neural signal mediated by the Vagas to slow the heart down so that's why inhal speed your heart up and exhales slow your heart down that is the basis of so-called RSA or respiratory sinus arhythmia now what does any of that have to do with the granularity of language that we place on our emotions turns out there's several studies showing that when people place more descriptive granularity on their emotions that is correlated with okay it's not causal but it's correlated with improvements in respiratory sinus arhythmia which we know correlate with improvements in heart rate variability indeed it's one of the major bases for heart rate variability which we know is correlated with not just positive physical health outcomes but positive mental health outcomes including lower levels of anxiety improved sleep and overall levels of mood this is a topic that I'm very familiar with because last year my laboratory at Stanford University School of Medicine in collaboration with a colleague of mine Dr David Spiegel our associate chair of Psychiatry also at Stanford University School of Medicine published a clinical trial and cell reports medicine showing that there's a particular pattern of breathing that people can do for just 5 minutes per day that is effective in significantly improving various metrics related to mood and reducing anxiety and also improving sleep although I should say the protocol I'm about to describe didn't uniformly improve all of those metrics it had a bigger effect on some versus others I'll provide a link to that study in the show note captions but if you're wondering what this protocol is that people did for 5 minutes a day that allowed them to by the way pervasively improve their mood so it wasn't just their mood while they were doing this five minute a day protocol it was improvements in mood Around the Clock essentially as well as improvements in other physiological metrics and other aspects of those six core pillars it was that physiological sigh that we talked about earlier although in this case we didn't have people do just one physiological sigh we had people set aside five minutes per day so set a timer for 5 minutes they could sit or lie down they could do it anytime of day and we just had them repeat that physiological sigh for a duration of 5 minutes total so that they would do two inhales through the nose and then a full exhale to lungs empty through the mouth then they would do it again and then they would do it again and again until those five minutes were completed again the outcome of that clinical trial was that that particular pattern of breathing which we called cyclic physiological sighing for five minutes per day again done any time of day had the most positive outcomes in terms of improving mood and mental health and autonomic function those things related to sleep and heart rate variability so that's a very simple very minimal time investment zero cost tool that anyone can use that again improves various metrics of physical health but also improves metrics of mental health and it ties right back in with what was observed in the work by Dr Lisa Feldman Barrett exploring how putting more word label emotional granularity on one's emotional states positively impact our physiological State and the fact that thinking about our emotions more frequently throughout the day and deliberately putting more label granularity on those emotions frequently throughout the day is correlated with this Improvement in respiratory sinus arhythmia and heart rate variability the fact that these things all relate to one another should not surprise us because indeed there's a previous paper this is a quite extensive review actually it's a very nice review it's one that I encourage anyone who's interested in these topics to explore especially psychologists who might have a interest in physiology or psychiatrists or simply people who are interested in mindbody stuff this is a review published in 2017 in the journal biological psychology entitled cardiac vagal control as a marker of emotion regulation in healthy adults a review and again it's a really wonderful literature review of the peer-reviewed primary research which really establishes that this thing vagal tone our ability to kind of put the brakes on our autonomic nervous system and slow our heart rate down deliberately through our breathing and perhaps even just by stopping and reflecting on what our emotional states are is really beneficial for our overall mood and mental health and I want to highlight bold and underline that word overall because it's not just the case that people experience elevated mood and mental health in the moments where they stop and go oh how am I feeling oh you know am I feeling you know bored or agitated do I feel particularly excited sure that can have some impact on physiological metrics and mood and mental health but in all of these studies the outcome seems to be that people's overall levels of mood and mental health are enhanced not just while they're thinking about their emotions or doing this five minute a day cyclic sighing but Around the Clock which is really terrific because I think that's what most all of us want which is improve mood and mental health not just in the moments when we do a practice or in the few minutes afterwards but 24 hours a day I suppose we might segment out sleep during which you know hopefully we're having great dreams as opposed to other kinds of dreams but the point is everyone I have to imagine would like to feel better and have elevated mood and mental health during the times when they're awake and indeed these sorts of protocols have been shown to do that or so say the scientific data now we are going to discuss the tools for enhancing mood and mental health gleaned from the four episode guest series with Dr Paul Ki who is a medical doctor specializing in Psychiatry he also has particular expertise in trauma however the four episode guest series that we did with Dr kti was really about exploring the self as well as tools and protocols for not just gaining a better understanding of oneself but also for gaining a better understanding and tools for relating to others AKA relationships thread through the series was a model of the mind and how it works to create everything from feelings thoughts to behaviors that Dr Paul Conti described as an iceberg model and I perhaps should refer you to the fact that he actually Drew out this model and we provided it as a zeroc cost PDF in the show note captions for every single one of those episodes in that four episode series we also provide a link to this model in the show note captions for this tools episode the model is called the iceberg model and as the name suggests it resembles an iceberg in which the vast majority of our mind's processing occurs below our conscious awareness in our unconscious mind so that's the portion of the iceberg that resides below the surface whereas the portion of our mental processing that we are aware of resides above the water surface the so-called conscious mind so a key aspect of the iceberg model is that the unconscious mind is responsible for the vast majority of our feelings thoughts and behaviors but that we are not aware of how this unconscious mind is doing that and by extension the tool and protocols that Dr Ki described largely deal with going into the unconscious and figuring out how the unconscious processing is influencing our conscious processing both in healthy and in unhealthy ways and when we say in healthy and unhealthy ways we're largely referring to the presence of defenses so some of you have perhaps heard of defenses before some defenses can indeed be healthy and others are unhealthy there are defenses such as projection sublimation denial and during the course of that four episode series Dr kti explains how projections are not always bad for us indeed they can protect us from Panic from severe trauma but they also can create difficulties in processing our own understanding of self and of our life experiences in ways that can actually be damaging to us so a key takeaway from that four episode series is to understand and acknowledge that your unconscious mind is driving much of what you feel think and do however by doing structured exploration of the self and we'll talk about how to do that one can gain better understanding of how that unconscious processing is influencing what you think feel believe and do so once you accept the important role of the unconscious mind and you make the decision that you want to better understand how your unconscious mind and conscious mind are in this constant dialogue and how you can have that dialogue better serve you there are a series of actionable tools that you can do that will allow you to better understand yourself and how you relate to others and the first of these tools is to really understand your self-concept now of course most all of us know our own name rarely do we ever forget that name we have some concept of where we're from who our parents are what our present and future goals might be where we've succeeded where we failed in life and on and on but the self-concept goes far beyond that sort of CV list or our biography of self indeed the self-concept has a lot to do with our self-confidence our feeling ings of ability both to overcome challenges but also our ability to serve the world that we're in and our ability to change ourselves over time now of course the degree to which somebody might have confidence or less confidence or the degree to which somebody feels that they can exert influence on their environment and their goals is of course going to vary based on their personal history but as Dr kti explained even independent of all that if one puts in some work to better understand their self-concept to to really get a clear picture of oneself from that one can develop more agency with which to pursue one's aspirations and to reach their goals and the key concept here is one that's particularly powerful for both exploring and building up one's concept of self and that's to consciously and deliberately build a life narrative now a simple way to do this that can be very effective is to create a series of folders or documents it could even be a stack of papers I prefer to do this in electronic form and I confess that even before learning about this tool from Dr Ki I had initiated doing this tool starting back in 2015 and it's fairly straightforward but as I mentioned before it can be very powerful and it simply consists of building out separate folders or pieces of paper and this could be done electronically or on real world paper with paper and pen or paper and pencil and essentially what you do is you're going to divide your life history into some regular increments so for for me the way that I did this is I created a folder on my laptop that I actually called lifetime so that's the title of the main folder and then within that folder I have a series of folders Each of which spans a particular phase of my life so 0 to 5 years of age 6 to 10 years of age 11 to 15 years of age and so on and so forth now I'm 48 years old so I have folders that extend to age 50 currently although I will add folders going forward very soon and the idea here is that for each of those folders you're going to place a single word document into that folder and then on that word document you're not going to journal you're not going to do any sort of extensive writing rather You're simply going to put down bullet points with titles it could be one or two sentences but typically it's just a few words describing some of the key Milestone events that you remember from that particular phase of your life so just for sake of example I'll read off some of the things that are included in the folders for my particular lifetime narrative but of course this relates to my lifetime narrative you should of course put the milestones and key bullet points that relate to your lifetime narrative but again just to give you a sense of the sorts of things that made it into this folder in my six years old to 11 year-old folder um on that document I put where I was living at that time the city I was living the school that I went to I put a couple of teachers names uh teachers that had a particular influence on me um a particular summer camp experience um that was not a traumatic experience by the way it was a happy experience but for me it turned out to be a very transformative one and then there are a couple other things in there that are just Recollections of childhood's friends names okay so seemingly mundane information perhaps but it looks more or less like a biography and yet other folders so for instance uh the folder that spans from 25 to 30 years of age is the time that I was in graduate school so it includes a note about graduate school a note about particular hobbies that I was interested in in addition to my scientific search at the time a couple of key relationships a couple of key relationship challenges as well as some things that at that time I was processing about prior years in particular my teen years in high school now the key thing here is that whatever goes into these folders is what's important to you it could be positive events it could be negative events it could be events that for whatever reason you remember and keep surfacing in your mind that you think might be interesting or important at some later time or that you're concerned you might forget in fact that might be a really good me for whether or not you include something in these folders or not if there's something that you want to make sure that you never forget but that you think you might forget I would encourage you to put it onto that word document and put it into that particular folder again this isn't about creating a coherent life story this is about creating a series of segments of small collections of key life events positive negative neutral inspiring basically anything that was Salient for you at that particular time and of course if you want to put Reflections about those particular events into that word document you're more than welcome to do that but the basis of this self-concept developing exercise is just that it's to develop a historical sense of yourself of course bringing you up to present day where you will continue to add things to whatever Word document goes into that particular folder for the age you happen to be now now for some of you this kind of autobiographical bullet pointing might seem like it's just that some attempt to build or write an autobiography but it's very important to remember that these folders are for you these folders are not about writing a book about your life history although if you decide to do that with these folders at some point down the line you know that sounds great but that's not the goal here the goal is for you to build a structured narrative representation of events that were key in your life and as described in the series with Dr kti this goes Way Beyond just understanding your past this is really about understanding past it's about understanding yourself at present and indeed it threads into your goals and aspirations for the future an important thing to understand about this tool or protocol is that it also has a incredible ability to Anchor you in your perception of the passage of time you know some of us track the passage of time better than others both within the day and across days and years and so forth but this exercise in particular is very good at allowing you to see you know how much time you devoted at a given stage of your life to a given Endeavor whether or not you're stuck in patterns whereby you're still engaging in certain types of things professionally or relationship wise or in any other number of different ways that have you in a pattern that may or may not be serving you well I want to emphasize again that this exercise is not about goal setting it's about your ability to build a structured narrative pattern from which you can look at it and then make a determination as to whether or not you know you feel that you're currently on the right path for you but it's not about projecting forward as to what your goals are we'll soon talk about that we'll talk about goals and aspirations in a moment this is really about better understanding what led you up to the place that you are now and it really helps you pinpoint the keyw work that you need to do in terms of exploring your unconscious and conscious mind using some tools that we're going to get into subsequently so there's really no strict rules about how to do this exactly except that I do encourage you to make those increments across your lifespan manageable I wouldn't suggest doing it one for every year I wouldn't suggest a folder one for every 10 years I think a 3 to 5 year increments seem like a more reasonable and tractable way to go about this so that's one of the sorts of tools that Dr Ki referred to as to how to build up one's self-concept which directly relates to things such as our confidence our ability to track our own behavior understand some of our motivations both conscious and unconscious but of course that practice is mainly a conscious exercise it's it's really not tapping directly into the unconscious in any kind of direct way as far as we know now we can contrast that with the tools and protocols that are designed to tap into the unconscious mind and of course there are a number of different ways to do this that were discussed in that four episode series with Dr Ki but one of the most powerful ways to do this is by thinking about and indeed sometimes writing about or even analyzing one's dreams now dream analysis is something for which you can find a lot of books out there there are a lot of theories there's also a lot of AR arent that perhaps dream analysis which has roots in fraudi and psychology as well as other Traditions is perhaps not accurate I don't think we want to consider whether or not dream analysis is accurate rather I think we should just acknowledge that when we are dreaming in particular the dreams that we have toward the later part of our night which are the dreams associated with rapid eye movement sleep that tend to be very emotionally Laden dreams as compared to the dreams that we have earlier in the night well when we consider the content of those dreams even even if we're not trying to interpret them it's very clear that those dreams reflect the unconscious mind controlling more of our internal dialogue or what we are experiencing at that time whereas when we are awake our conscious mind tends to take over more of the narrative the internal narrative and the control of our feelings thoughts and behaviors but as I mentioned before the unconscious mind is always exerting an influence regardless of whether or not we are sleep or awake with that said one way to explore the unconscious mind and to begin to get a better understand about how it might be influencing our waking States and behaviors is to actually record and think about one's dreams now of course some people remember their dreams on a regular basis other people don't some people actually believe that they don't dream studies out of sleep Laboratories at Stanford University of Pennsylvania Harvard and elsewhere all generally agree that everybody dreams but not everybody remembers their dreams so if you're interested in tapping into an understanding of what your dreams are telling you which is basically a way of saying what your unconscious mind or dialogue consists of I highly recommend putting a journal so this would be any kind of paper and pen or paper and pencil type journal and the idea is this if you wake up and you can remember your dream write down a few key bullet points from that dream if you feel you can write out the dream in a very kind of linear narrative this happened then that happened then this happened then that happened great but most most people find that their memory of their dream is rather fragmentary other people can't remember their dream or at least they wake up they feel like they were having a dream but they can't remember all of it or key components of it and for that I suggest that you try keeping your body completely still and closing your eyes once again we don't quite understand why this is but when you look at the literature on dream recollection it seems that by keeping one's body completely still with eyes closed we have better access to whatever the contents of the dream that just occurred were okay so if you wake up and you can't remember your dreams try lying still for a few minutes and keeping your eyes closed and seeing whether or not that helps surface the content of that dream other people find that they get up they get out of bed and then sometime in the middle of the morning maybe even later in the day the contents of a dream will just come to them well if that happens great I also highly recommend that you have a way to write down the contents of the of that dream now what you're looking for when you do this sort of tool or protocol I encourage you to be wary of any immediate interpretation of for instance okay animals in a dream mean children although they could you know there's not a lot of science that really supports that as a firm statement and of course there are books out there and podcasts and a ton of information trying to help you interpret your dreams and while some of that can be fun and not all of it is entirely useless the goal here is not to interpret your dreams the goal here is to start recording some of the key takeaways Maybe maybe even the entire Narrative of the dreams that you have just prior to waking as a way to try and understand some of the themes that are occurring and recurring in the dialogue that exists within your unconscious mind so a key aspect of this tool is that you're not going to take any one dream as an enormously informative dream it might be but more important in this particular tool is to write down the themes of a particular dream and then see whether or not those particular themes resurface again and again across different nights or across different dreams the idea here is that things that are repeating thematically will show up as different components in different dreams but that by keeping a dream journal you can start to identify some of these patterns that are occurring from one dream to the next as opposed to having the same dream over and over but the point here is that you can explore the contents and the themes that's really the most important word here the themes of your unconscious mind that is a occurring if you start thinking about what's recurring during your dreams because dreams are a time when your unconscious mind is dominating The Narrative within your mind and brain now for those of you that dream a lot and remember your dreams as well as for those of you that do not I would also encourage you to explore the contents of your thinking that is thinking about your thinking during so-called Lial States and the Lial State during which this can be particularly useful is Right upon waking so this is different than thinking about what you were dreaming about this is about keeping your eyes closed and body still we do think that that's important for doing this well because once you start moving your body you open your eyes and you start bringing in sensory experience for that day your mind dramatically shifts towards conscious processing but in that Lial State between sleeping and awake when you wake up and you're a little sleepy maybe you don't want to get out of bed this happens to me all too often try closing your eyes and remaining perfectly still for maybe one to three minutes maybe five minutes and just pay attention to where your mind goes now you might fall back asleep be mindful of that depending on what you need to do that morning but a lot of people will find that their mind goes into this place that's neither sleep nor awake right this is a state that very much resembles the state people achieve in things like Yoga Nidra yoga sleep or in non-sleep deep rest although it tends to be more dominated by the unconscious mind a little bit more sleep-like now some people find this practice to be difficult because they're the sort of people that wake up and they're just immediately ready to go most people however myself included find that when they wake up you know the mind isn't completely alert yet and you can use that period again just maybe two or three minutes maybe five minutes to start to pay attention to the contents of your thinking see whether or not your thinking migrates from you know something related to work or to relationship or to self or to something you want to do or something that you're anxious about and so on and so on and here too you'll want to write this down so this is very much like the dream journaling we just talked about but it's slightly easier for most people to access especially people who have a hard time remembering their dreams and again it's an opportunity to access some of the contents of your unconscious mind to learn to look at and see what's going on in your unconscious mind in a way that's very difficult if not impossible to do unless you're working with somebody who's very good at accessing unconscious such as a skilled psychiatrist or psychoanalyst and in that way allowing you to do introspective work which is not structured in terms of thinking trying to think about like what do I want what's going on you know why did they do that why did I react that way nothing like that you're simply observing your mind and seeing what's geysering up from the unconscious that is you're getting a portal into that portion of the iceberg that resides below the surface of the water the next set of tools for exploring the self self-concept Etc from that four episode series with Dr Ki is journaling I'm going to do an entire episode of The hubman Lab podcast about journaling and there are a lot of different kinds of journaling and fortunately there are a lot of great peer-reviewed studies about the power of journaling for processing all sorts of things like emotional states trauma Etc they're basically two categories of journaling that are very useful to carry out on a consistent basis and when I say consistent basis that could mean every day or it could mean three times a week it could even be once a week there really no hard and fast rules about this but when we think about journaling there really two main styles of journaling one is going to be free associative journaling sometimes people talk about this as a data dump right typically people will talk about the data dump as the morning notes which is when you wake up in the morning you know you got a lot on your mind you can't organize your mind people who have a hard time structuring their thinking and behavior often find this very useful which is to you know take out a journal or a piece of paper again this is is just for you it's important that you realize and really make sure that you're the only person that's going to see these notes because a lot of people get into self-monitoring when they're doing their journaling they're thinking about well how's this going to look is my handwriting okay how's my punctuation what are people going to think is this going to be a good book or not a good book listen none of this journaling that we're referring to is about your book or your autobiography this is really just for you this is an exploration of yourself that's designed to help you enhance your concept that is your understanding of self and indeed translates to better confidence better understanding of your goals and aspirations better understanding of your unhealthy patterns and defenses and on and on and so again the two styles of journaling are free association so where you literally just write down any that comes to mind or that you feel like writing down within a given period of time for most people 10 minutes is ample time to do that for some people five will be enough and for some who have the time maybe 30 30 minutes but for me and I think for most people out there anywhere from 5 to 10 minutes of this data dump free association you know it could be your anxieties what you're thinking about what you're anxious about really could be about anything that comes to mind and this free association process can be very useful for clearing out the Clutter so to speak the other style of journaling that's equally useful but for different reasons is structure journaling to have a goal for a given entry on a given day and again this could be done in the morning afternoon or night and the idea would be that you would set an intention and by intention I mean a specific topic that you're going to restrict your writing to and that writing should be about self in particular goals and aspirations what you've wanted in the past yes but also what you want at present what you might want in the future for yourself these could of course be material things but in general this is more about aspirations of things that you would like like to accomplish or generate and the key word there is generate and if you listen to the four episode series with Dr kti he talked about three drives that exist in all of us these three drives are the aggressive Drive the pleasure drive and the generative drive and we don't need to go into a lengthy description about these drives right now if you're curious about them and what they represent and uh how they can be in balance or out of balance and how that serves us or doesn't serve us please check out that four episode series with Dr because he goes into that in a fair amount of detail and also in an actionable way but the key thing here is that we're generative you know one of the things that I asked Dr kti at the outset and throughout the entire series was you know what is mental health you know we talk about physical health and we have some idea of what that represents you know healthy blood pressure the ability to do certain forms of physical movement cognitive abilities you know I asked him how can we Define mental health and his answer was very straightforward and very powerful he said said what we all need to Aspire to is to be in states that is in the verb actions of agency and gratitude for as much of our Waking Life as possible now that sounds great right a sense of agency the ability to exert influence over our internal State and affect the world around us in positive ways positive relationships reach our goals as well as gratitude being grateful for the opportunities that we've been afforded even grateful perhaps for some of the challenges that we've been afforded or that uh were selected for us that we had no control over and carrying that agency and gratitude forward because it gives rise to a sense of Peace contentment and Delight so all of that sounds wonderful right be in agency and gratitude as a verb States experience peace contentment and Delight but Dr kti acknowledged and we spent a good amount of time discussing the fact that doesn't happen just because we decide we want to in fact agency and gratitude peace contentment and Delight geyser up from a whole set of other processes that we have to engage in on a regular basis and that really gets us back to those three drives he talked about how people tend to have more or less aggressive drive not just aggression in terms of violence although some people do have that but in terms of their determination and their sort of Leaning into friction even seeking out a friction people are on a Continuum with respect to the aggressive drive he also talked about the pleasure drive and the fact that people are on a Continuum of the desire for pleasure to either be a hedonist or somebody who really avoids pleasure and kind of restricts pleasure from oneself and again that these things can slide around depending on our life circumstances our age Etc but that it's very important that we have a sense of where we are on that Continuum of an aggressive drive and a pleasure drive and that and here's the most important thing that our aggressive drive and pleasure Drive never outsize our generative drive and that engaging our generative Drive is really the Hallmark of mental health that leads to that sense of agency and gratitude peace contentment and delight and he defined the generative Drive in the following way he said the generative Drive is our desire to create build and contribute to the world in meaningful ways and appreciate the process to get there it is the core feature of our mental health so if you want to learn more about the various drives and how they interact and how to access more generative drive again that's all contained in the four episode series with Dr Ki but taking us back to the tools and takeaways from that four episode series the process of journaling in free association mode or the process of journaling in a conscious structured way is really about trying to access the generative drive and to build up that generative drive and one of the key things about conscious journaling is that it affords us the opportunity in a way that's not going to be seen by anybody else to really think about what our goals and aspirations are now you might say you know I can't even think about my goals and aspirations I don't I don't know know what I want well that's fine then you should Journal about that however most people have some sense of what they would like but most people are simply not comfortable with writing those things out or even thinking about them and if you reflect on that how could it ever be that you would achieve those goals and aspirations if you're not even feeling comfortable enough to think about them or write about them and so the process of thinking about and writing about your goals and aspirations is perhaps one of the key first steps towards being able to actualize those goals and aspirations and for some people this might be very easy to do you can simply write down say I want to you know be married by this age and I want to you know make x amount of money and I want to live here or there and certainly those sorts of goals and aspirations are perfectly valid for this type of exercise but so are the sorts of goals and aspirations that relate to feeling States like yeah I would like to feel part of a community I would like to feel like an active contributor to a community and then the essential thing is to really flesh out out the detail around those goals and aspirations you know what size Community uh where do you see yourself fitting into this community are you doing this alongside other people or by yourself in other words to really get comfortable thinking about what your goals and aspirations are again completely from the perspective of self and that you are going to be the only person to see this particular document now I will be the first to admit that the exercise that I just described not the free association journaling but the structured journaling of goals and aspirations I and many people find to be difficult to initiate difficult to initiate because there seems to be a bit of internal anxiety and friction around doing it there seems to be something that keeps many not all but many people from feeling as if they are even allowed to think about their goals and aspirations because many people default to well then you know I'll just be disappointed because it's not going to work out I don't want to think about what I want because then I'll just be more disappointed and that particular frame of mind was actually discussed in the series with Dr Cony and he convinced me and he's the expert that the opposite is actually true when we are able to overcome some of our anxiety and really think about in a dedicated way what we would like to create for ourselves in our lives both present and future and keeping in mind our events of past because we always carry that life narrative forward then we are in a far better place to actualize those goals and aspirations and he explained a variety of reasons why that's the case and his clinical observations and some of the are observations that really support that statement so I highly encourage you to think about embracing a process of journaling again you don't have to do this every day the journaling and the dream analysis take a little bit more time but they are oh so valuable for better understanding one's self-concept and they really thread forward into real everyday actions that can positively enrich your mood and mental health now any description of science-based tools for mood and mental health would be incomplete without including some tools related to processing of traumas now the processing of traumas is something that especially in the case of major traumas or repeated traumas really should be carried out in concert with a expert trained clinician that is a psychologist or psychiatrist who's trained in helping people work through traumas however even if you're working with somebody who's expert in processing trauma there are specific tools that you can use on your own to accelerate that process and for people who are working through what are sometimes called more minor traumas these are sometimes called Big tea big traumas and little te little traumas however you know that nomenclature doesn't take into account the fact that you know most of us can probably tell what the big traumas are for ourselves and for others but sometimes it's hard to tell whether or not those small traumas the little tea traumas actually are big te traumas so you know this is one of the major reasons why working with a licensed professional is really going to be advantageous and in many cases necessary to work through trauma that said the self directed protocols for working through trauma have a lot to do with how we think about but more importantly at times how we talk about those traumas and Dr Paul kti talked about this not so much in the four episode series with us but in a particular podcast episode that he did with Dr Peter Atia who some of you are perhaps familiar with for his incredible podcast the drive but also for his excellent book outlive which deals with health span and lifespan or longevity now in that particular conversation with Dr Ki and Dr AA Dr kti emphasized the fact that one of the ways that we hold ourselves back and indeed can exacerbate the negative consequences of trauma are the ways in which we modify our language to describe those traumas and what he said which is so important is that often times we don't allow ourselves to use language that's as big as is necessary to explain that trauma and the impact of that that trauma on us and on others in fact many people start to you know relegate their language to more passible in a given sentence or passible in a given conversation now what we're not talking about here is the idea that okay you know screaming at somebody else about your trauma or using a lot of four-letter words is necessarily the best way to process that trauma verbally however we are talking about allowing oneself either in spoken form or in written form to really allow the magnitude of a given trauma to be expressed with a fair degree of intensity and language that can capture at least some of what that trauma represented for us or for others now as Dr kti pointed out all too often we do the opposite what ends up happening is people will experience some sort of trauma either major or minor maybe single or repeated trauma and rather than being comfortable talking about it rather than using language that captures at least some of the magnitude of that trauma for them people start to talk about that trauma less frequently they start to distract themselves to think about other things instead of talking about or thinking about that trauma and what happens is that trauma Roots into our unconscious mind and starts to impact Us in negative ways now those negative ways include increases in anxiety disruptions in sleep in fact one of the common ways in which trauma manifests in disruptions in sleep by way of rooting our unconscious is that people will wake up at 2:30 or 3:00 in the morning let's just say after several hours of being asleep and immediately they're thinking about that thing that happened and they're upset about it the idea is that when we push those traumas down when we don't talk about them with people that we trust when we don't have a way to consciously process those traumas using language that at least partially matches the magnitude of the impact of those traumas for us well then those traumas impact our unconscious mind in ways that lead our unconscious mind to literally wake us up in the middle of the night and remind us of that thing it's as if it's being thrown back in our face over and over also sometimes traumas will root their way down into our unconscious and then they will resurface in the mode of compulsive or obsessive thinking about that thing or perhaps other things again the unconscious mind has a interesting and complicated number of different ways that it defends us the ways that it you know can create denial distraction that we might get hyperfocused on work as a way to not think about the trauma or hyper focused on some details in our environment and just really trying to focus on that because it's much easier to process and handle that than these traumas you know again the processing of trauma is a whole landscape into itself that actually was um beautifully described in terms of how it arises within us and how to process traumas in a really structured way in a just fabulous book that was written by Dr Ki called The Invisible epidemic how trauma works and how we can heal from it and in that book Dr Ki explains a number of different ways that we can do self-directed work as well as work with licensed professionals to process traumas and help us move through those traumas so that they are not negatively impacting us going forward so I really encourage anyone that's trying to process traumas from the past and or present to check out Dr kti's book because it's a spectacular resource but in terms of the tools related to processing trauma that we're talking about right now I think this point about really making sure that we allow ourselves to verbally process and emotionally process that trauma in a way that there's room for using language that captures some of the magnitude of that trauma and how it impacted us and others is going to be very important because otherwise what ends up happening is that we tend to adopt feelings of guilt and shame around those traumas simply by not talking about them by having them go Inward and then they start to negatively impact our unconscious mind and then our unconscious mind tries to throw them up to the surface for our conscious mind to recognize by waking us up from sleep and in some cases by leveraging those unhealthy defenses things like denial things like you know the overindulgence in alcohol overindulgence of drugs ways to distract ourselves as well as projection and sublimation and the other types of defenses that Dr kti talked about in the four episode series again those defenses are not necessarily good or bad it depends on the circumstances the unconscious mind is not trying to harm us your unconscious mind is part of you it is you but of course it is you acting in concert with your conscious mind and so really the tools and protocols from the four episode series with Dr Ki are aimed at helping you feel and access more sense of agency and gratitude on a regular basis more peace contentment and delight and doing so by touching into those different drives understanding what they are the aggressive Drive the pleasure drive and really making sure that your generative drive again I love this description of the generative drive so much so that I'm going to read it again because this is really what it means to be mentally healthy again the generative Drive is our desire to create build and contribute to the world in a meaningful way and appreciate the process to get there it is the core feature of our mental health so being able to access that generative drive on a regular basis is is really what this thing that we call mental health is all about and the tools that I just described of course can be combined with in any number of different ways with the tools that I described glean largely from the episode with Dr Lisa Feldman Barrett and so what you now have is a kit of tools and protocols for improving mood and mental health some of which are grounded in that core six the you know first principles of self-care are always going to be getting your physiology right so that your psychology can be right as well well of course you want to emphasize tools and protocols that build up your psychological processes and concept of self that's what the tools from the Conti series that we just described are all about and then the tools from the episode with Dr Lisa Feldman Barrett sort of bridge the two because she talked about both the physiological and the psychological tools that really represent ways to enhance our mood and mental health and so by threading these three things together I believe it really arms us with the greatest degree of optimism and capacity to take control of this thing that we call our mood and emotions and to of course allow ourselves to feel the negative things we need to feel but then process them in healthy ways and to exist as much as is reasonably possible in generally optimistic upbeat states that allow us to engage our generative drive and although we covered a lot of tools during this episode again I want to emphasize that the idea isn't to necessarily do all of them all at once maybe just pick one or two and start to implement them on a regular basis basis and by implementing those there's no reason to think that you would be significantly eating into your other demands on your time because ultimately the whole purpose of having elevated mood and mental health is so that you can have better relationship to yourself and better relationship to others and to the world around you if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a festar review please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests that you'd like me to consider hosting on the hubman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube I do read all the comments not so much on today's episode but on many previous episodes of The hubman Lab podcast we discussed supplements while supplements aren't necessary for everybody many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like enhancing sleep hormone support and focus to learn more about the supplements discussed on the hubman Lab podcast you can go to live momentus spelled o us so that's live mous.com huberman if you're not already following me on social media I am huberman lab on all social media platforms so that's Instagram X formerly known as Twitter threads LinkedIn and Facebook and on all those platforms I discuss science and science related tools some of which overlaps with the content of the huberman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the content on the huberman Lab podcast so again it's hubman lab on all social media platforms if you haven't already subscribed to the hubman Lab podcast monthly neural network newsletter the neural network newsletter is a completely zeroc cost newsletter that includes summaries of podcast episodes as well as toolkits toolkits are brief PDFs that describe in bullet point Form Tools for for instance enhancing sleep neuroplasticity deliberate cold exposure deliberate heat exposure Fitness dopamine regulation and much more to sign up for the hubman Lab podcast neural network newsletter simply go to huberman lab.com go to the menu tab scroll down to newsletter and put in your email we do not share your email with anybody thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion all about science-based tools for enhancing mood and mental health and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in [Music] science

========================================

--- Video 175 ---
Video ID: 1Wo6SqLNmLk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1Wo6SqLNmLk
Title: Mark Zuckerberg & Dr. Priscilla Chan: Curing All Human Diseases & the Future of Health & Technology
Published: 2023-10-23 12:00:02 UTC
Description:
In this episode, my guests are Mark Zuckerberg, CEO of Meta (formerly Facebook, Inc.), and his wife, Dr. Priscilla Chan, M.D., co-founder and co-CEO of the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative (CZI). We discuss how CZI plans to cure all human diseases by the end of this century by funding transformative projects and technologies at the intersection of biology, engineering, and artificial intelligence (AI). They describe their funding and development of Biohubs and the progress already underway to accelerate the understanding of cell function, pathways, and disease. Then, Mark discusses social media, its impact on mental health, and new tools for online experiences. We also discuss Meta’s virtual reality (VR), augmented and mixed reality tech, and how AI will soon completely transform our online and physical life experiences. This episode ought to interest anyone curious about biology, medicine, mental health, AI, and the future of technology and humanity.

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman 
Momentous: https://livemomentous.com/huberman

The Brain Body Contract
Tickets: https://www.hubermanlab.com/events
Pre-sale password: HUBERMAN

Huberman Lab Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://www.hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter

Mark Zuckerberg
Meta Website: https://about.meta.com 
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/zuck 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@zuck 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/zuck 
Meta profile: https://about.meta.com/media-gallery/executives/mark-zuckerberg
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/mark-zuckerberg-618bba58 

Dr. Priscilla Chan
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/priscilla 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/priscilla-chan-907181a3 

Chan Zuckerberg Initiative (CZI)
CZI website: https://chanzuckerberg.com 
CZI Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/chanzuckerberginitiative
CZI Threads: https://www.threads.net/@chanzuckerberginitiative 
CZI X: https://twitter.com/ChanZuckerberg 

Other Resources
CELLxGENE: https://cellxgene.cziscience.com 
Chan Zuckerberg Biohub Network: https://www.czbiohub.org 
CZI Biohub San Francisco: https://www.czbiohub.org/sf
CZI Biohub Chicago: https://www.czbiohub.org/chi
CZI Biohub New York: https://www.czbiohub.org/ny
Adam Mosseri: https://www.instagram.com/mosseri 
Dr. Jeremy Bailenson: https://profiles.stanford.edu/jeremy-bailenson
Ray-Ban Meta Smart Glasses: https://www.ray-ban.com/usa/ray-ban-meta-smart-glasses

Timestamps
00:00:00 Mark Zuckerberg & Dr. Priscilla Chan
00:02:15 Sponsors: Eight Sleep & LMNT; The Brain Body Contract
00:05:35 Chan Zuckerberg Initiative (CZI) & Human Disease Research
00:08:51 Innovation & Discovery, Science & Engineering
00:12:53 Funding, Building Tools & Imaging
00:17:57 Healthy vs. Diseased Cells, Human Cell Atlas & AI, Virtual Cells
00:21:59 Single Cell Methods & Disease; CELLxGENE Tool 
00:28:22 Sponsor: AG1
00:29:53 AI & Hypothesis Generation; Long-term Projects & Collaboration
00:35:14 Large Language Models (LLMs), In Silico Experiments
00:42:11 CZI Biohubs, Chicago, New York
00:50:52 Universities & Biohubs; Therapeutics & Rare Diseases
00:57:23 Optimism; Children & Families
01:06:21 Sponsor: InsideTracker
01:07:25 Technology & Health, Positive & Negative Interactions
01:13:17 Algorithms, Clickbait News, Individual Experience
01:19:17 Parental Controls, Meta Social Media Tools & Tailoring Experience
01:24:51 Time, Usage & Technology, Parental Tools
01:28:55 Virtual Reality (VR), Mixed Reality Experiences & Smart Glasses
01:36:09 Physical Exercise & Virtual Product Development
01:44:19 Virtual Futures for Creativity & Social Interactions
01:49:31 Ray-Ban Meta Smart Glasses: Potential, Privacy & Risks
02:00:20 Visual System & Smart Glasses, Augmented Reality
02:06:42 AI Assistants & Creators, Identity Protection
02:13:26 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, YouTube Feedback, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

#HubermanLab #Science #Technology

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English
ANDREW HUBERMAN: Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [MUSIC PLAYING] I'm Andrew Huberman. And I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. My guests today are Mark Zuckerberg and Dr. Priscilla Chan. Mark Zuckerberg, as everybody knows, founded the company Facebook. He is now the CEO of Meta, which includes Facebook, Instagram, WhatsApp, and other technology platforms. Dr. Priscilla Chan graduated from Harvard and went on to do her medical degree at the University of California San Francisco. Mark Zuckerberg and Dr. Priscilla Chan are married and the co-founders of the CZI, or Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, a philanthropic organization whose stated goal is to cure all human diseases. The Chan Zuckerberg Initiative is accomplishing that by providing critical funding not available elsewhere, as well as a novel framework for discovery of the basic functioning of cells, cataloging all the different human cell types, as well as providing AI, or artificial intelligence, platforms to mine all of that data to discover new pathways and cures for all human diseases. The first hour of today's discussion is held with both Dr. Priscilla Chan and Mark Zuckerberg, during which we discuss the CZI and what it really means to try and cure all human diseases. We talk about the motivational backbone for the CZI that extends well into each of their personal histories. Indeed, you'll learn quite a lot about Dr. Priscilla Chan, who has, I must say, an absolutely incredible family story leading up to her role as a physician and her motivations for the CZI and beyond. And you'll learn from Mark, how he is bringing an engineering and AI perspective to the discovery of new cures for human disease. The second half of today's discussion is just between Mark Zuckerberg and me, during which we discuss various Meta Platforms, including, of course, social media platforms, and their effects on mental health in children and adults. We also discuss VR, Virtual Reality, as well as augmented and mixed reality. And we discuss AI, Artificial Intelligence, and how it stands to transform not just our online experiences with social media and other technologies, but how it stands to potentially transform every aspect of everyday life. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science-related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Eight Sleep Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capacity. I've spoken many times before on this podcast about the fact that getting a great night's sleep really is the foundation of mental health, physical health and performance. One of the key things to getting a great night's sleep is to make sure that the temperature of your sleeping environment is correct. And that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep, your body temperature actually has to drop by about 1 to 3 degrees. And in order to wake up feeling refreshed and energized, your body temperature actually has to increase by about 1 to 3 degrees. With Eight Sleep, you can program the temperature of your sleeping environment in the beginning, middle, and end of your night. It has a number of other features, like tracking the amount of rapid eye movement and slow wave sleep that you get, things that are essential to really dialing in the perfect night's sleep for you. I've been sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress cover for well over two years now. And it has greatly improved my sleep. I fall asleep far more quickly. I wake up far less often in the middle of the night. And I wake up feeling far more refreshed than I ever did prior to using an Eight Sleep mattress cover. If you'd like to try Eight Sleep, you can go to eightsleep.com/huberman to save $150 off their Pod 3 cover. Eight Sleep currently ships to the USA, Canada, UK, select countries in the EU, and Australia. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by LMNT. LMNT is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't. That means plenty of electrolytes-- sodium, magnesium and potassium-- and no sugar. The electrolytes are absolutely essential for the functioning of every cell in your body. And your neurons, your nerve cells, rely on sodium, magnesium and potassium in order to communicate with one another electrically and chemically. LMNT contains the optimal ratio of electrolytes for the functioning of neurons and the other cells of your body. Every morning, I drink a packet of LMNT dissolved in about 32 ounces of water. I do that just for general hydration and to make sure that I have adequate electrolytes for any activities that day. I'll often also have an LMNT packet, or even two packets, in 32 to 60 ounces of water if I'm exercising very hard and certainly if I'm sweating a lot, in order to make sure that I replace those electrolytes. If you'd like to try LMNT, you can go to drinklmnt.com/huberman to get a free sample pack with your purchase. Again, that's drinklmnt.com/huberman. I'm pleased to announce that we will be hosting four live events in Australia, each of which is entitled The Brain Body Contract, during which I will share science and science-related tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. There will also be a live question and answer session. We have limited tickets still available for the event in Melbourne on February 10, as well as the event in Brisbane on February 24. Our event in Sydney, at the Sydney Opera House, sold out very quickly. So as a consequence, we've now scheduled a second event in Sydney at the Aware Super Theatre on February 18. To access tickets to any of these events, you can go to hubermanlab.com/events and use the code Huberman at checkout. I hope to see you there. And as always, thank you for your interest in science. And now, for my discussion with Mark Zuckerberg and Dr. Priscilla Chan. Priscilla, Mark, so great to meet you. And thank you for having me here in your home. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Oh, Thanks for having us on the podcast. PRISCILLA CHAN: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I'd like to talk about the CZI, the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative. I learned about this a few years ago, when my lab was-- and still is now-- at Stanford, as a very exciting philanthropic effort that has a truly big mission. I can't imagine a bigger mission. So maybe you could tell us what that big mission is. And then we can get into some of the mechanics of how that big mission can become a reality. PRISCILLA CHAN: So like you're mentioning, in 2015, we launched the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative. And what we were hoping to do at CZI was think about how do we build a better future for everyone and looking for ways where we can contribute the resources that we have to bring philanthropically and the experiences that Mark and I have had, for me as a physician and educator, for Mark as an engineer, and then our ability to bring teams together to build the builders. Mark has been a builder throughout his career. And what could we do if we actually put together a team to build tools, do great science? And so within our science portfolio, we've really been focused on what some people think is either an incredibly audacious goal or an inevitable goal. But I think about it as something that will happen if we continue focusing on it, which is to be able to cure, prevent, or manage all disease by the end of the century. ANDREW HUBERMAN: All disease? PRISCILLA CHAN: All disease. So that's important, right? And so a lot of times, people ask like, which disease? And the whole point is that there is not one disease. And it's really about taking a step back to where I always found the most hope as a physician, which is new discoveries and new opportunities and new ways of understanding how to keep people well come from basic science. So our strategy at CZI is really to build tools, fund science, change the way basic scientists can see the world and how they can move quickly in their discoveries. And so that's what we launched in 2015. We do work in three ways. We fund great scientists. We build tools-- right now, software tools to help move science along and make it easier for scientists to do their work. And we do science. You mentioned Stanford being an important pillar for our science work. We've built what we call biohubs, institutes where teams can take on grand challenges to do work that wouldn't be possible in a single lab or within a single discipline. And our first biohub was launched in San Francisco, a collaboration between Stanford, UC Berkeley, and UCSF. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Amazing. Curing all diseases implies that there will either be a ton of knowledge gleaned from this effort, which I'm certain there will be-- and there already has been. We can talk about some of those early successes in a moment. But it also sort of implies that if we can understand some basic operations of diseases and cells that transcend autism, Huntington's, Parkinson's, cancer and any other disease that perhaps there are some core principles that would make the big mission a real reality, so to speak. What I'm basically saying is, how are you attacking this? My belief is that the cell sits at the center of all discussion about disease, given that our body is made up of cells and different types of cells. So maybe you could just illuminate for us a little bit of what the cell is, in your mind, as it relates to disease and how one goes about understanding disease in the context of cells because, ultimately, that's what we're made up of. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah. Well, let's get to the cell thing in a moment. But just even taking a step back from that, we don't think, at CZI, that we're going to cure, prevent or manage all diseases. The goal is to basically give the scientific community and scientists around the world the tools to accelerate the pace of science. And we spent a lot of time, when we were getting started with this, looking at the history of science and trying to understand the trends and how they've played out over time. And if you look over this very long-term arc, most large-scale discoveries are preceded by the invention of a new tool or a new way to see something. And it's not just in biology, right? It's like having a telescope came before a lot of discoveries in astronomy and astrophysics. But similarly, the microscope and just different ways to observe things or different platforms, like the ability to do vaccines preceded the ability to cure a lot of different things. So this is the engineering part that you were talking about, about building tools. We view our goal is to try to bring together some scientific and engineering knowledge to build tools that empower the whole field. And that's the big arc and a lot of the things that we're focused on, including the work in single cell and cell understanding, which you can jump in and get into that if you want. But yeah, I think I think we generally agree with the premise that if you want to understand this stuff from first principles-- people study organs a lot right. You study how things present across the body. But there's not a very widespread understanding of how each cell operates. And this is a big part of some of the initial work that we tried to do on the Human Cell Atlas and understanding what are the different cells. And there's a bunch more work that we want to do to carry that forward. But overall, I think, when we think about the next 10 years here of this long arc to try to empower the community to be able to cure, prevent or manage all diseases, we think that the next 10 years should really be primarily about being able to measure and observe more things in human biology. There are a lot of limits to that. It's like you want to look at something through a microscope, you can't usually see living tissues because it's hard to see through skin or things like that. So there are a lot of different techniques that will help us observe different things. And this is where the engineering background comes in a bit because-- I mean, when I think about this is from the perspective of how you'd write code or something, the idea of trying to debug or fix a code base, but not be able to step through the code line by line, it's not going to happen, right? And at the beginning of any big project that we do at Meta, we like to spend a bunch of the time up front just trying to instrument things and understand what are we going to look at and how are we going to measure things so we know we're making progress and know what to optimize. And this is such a long-term journey that we think that it actually makes sense to take the next 10 years to build those kinds of tools for biology and understanding just how the human body works in action. And a big part of that is, cells. I don't know. Do you want to jump and talk about some of the efforts? PRISCILLA CHAN: Sure. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Could I just interrupt briefly and just ask about the different interventions, so to speak, that CZI is in a unique position to bring to the quest to cure all diseases? So I can think of-- I mean, I know, as a scientist, that money is necessary but not sufficient, right? When you have money, you can hire more people. You can try different things. So that's critical. But a lot of philanthropy includes money. The other component is you want to be able to see things, as you pointed out. So you want to know that normal disease process-- like, what is a healthy cell? What's a diseased cell? Are cells constantly being bombarded with challenges and then repairing those? And then what we call cancer is just a runaway train of those challenges not being met by the cell itself or something like that? So better imaging tools. And then it sounds like there's not just a hardware component, but a software component. This is where AI comes in. So maybe, at some point, we can break this up into two, three different avenues. One is understanding disease processes and healthy processes. We'll lump those together. Then there's hardware-- so microscopes, lenses, digital deconvolution, ways of seeing things in bolder relief and more precision. And then there's how to manage all the data. And then I love the idea that maybe AI could do what human brains can't do alone, like manage understanding of the data because it's one thing to organize data. It's another to say, oh, this as you point out in the analogy with code, that this particular gene and that particular gene are potentially interesting, whereas a human being would never make that potential connection. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah. PRISCILLA CHAN: So the tools that CZI can bring to the table-- we fund science, like you're talking about. There's lots of ways to fund science. And just to be clear, what we fund is a tiny fraction of what the NIH funds, for instance. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So you guys have been generous enough that it definitely holds wait to NIH's contribution. PRISCILLA CHAN: Yeah. But I think every funder has its own role in the ecosystem. And for us, it's really, how do we incentivize new points of view? How do we incentivize collaboration? How do we incentivize open science? And so a lot of our grants include inviting people to look at different fields. Our first neuroscience RFA was aimed towards incentivizing people from different backgrounds-- immunologists, microbiologists-- to come and look at how our nervous system works and how to keep it healthy. Or we ask that our grantees participate in the pre-print movement to accelerate the rate of sharing knowledge and actually others being able to build upon science. So that's the funding that we do. In terms of building, we build software and hardware, like you mentioned. We put together teams that can build tools that are more durable and scalable than someone in a single lab might be incentivized to do. There's a ton of great ideas. And nowadays, most scientists can tinker and build something useful for their lab. But it's really hard for them to be able to share that tool sometimes beyond their own laptop or forget the next Lab over or across the globe. So we partner with scientists to see what is useful, what kinds of tools. In imaging, Napari, it's a useful image annotation tool that is born from an open source community. And how can we contribute to that? Or a CELLxGENE, which works on single cell data sets. And how can we make it build a useful tool so that scientists can share data sets, analyze their own and contribute to a larger corpus of information? So we have software teams that are building, collaborating with scientists to make sure that we're building easy to use, durable, translatable tools across the scientific community in the areas that we work in. We also have institutes-- this is where the imaging work comes in-- where we are proud owners of an electron microscope right now. It's going to be installed at our imaging institute. And that will really contribute to the way where we can see work differently. But more hardware does need to be developed. We're partnering with the fantastic scientists in the biohub network to build a mini-phase plate to increase to align the electrons through the electron microscope to be able to increase the resolution, so we can see in sharper detail. So there's a lot of innovative work within the network that's happening. And these institutes have grand challenges that they're working on. Back to your question about cells, cells are just the smallest unit that are alive. And your body, all of our bodies, have many, many, many cells. Some estimate of like 37 trillion cells, different cells in your body. And what are they all doing? And what do they look like when you're healthy? What do they look like when you're sick? And where we're at right now with our understanding of cells and what happens when you get sick is basically we've gotten pretty good at, from the Human Genome Project, looking at how different mutations in your genetic code lead for you to be more susceptible to get sick or directly cause you to get sick. So we go from a mutation in your DNA to, wow, you now have Huntington's disease, for instance. And there's a lot that happens in the middle. And that's one of the questions that we're going after at CZI, is what actually happens. So an analogy that I like to use to share with my friends is, right now, say we have a recipe for a cake. We know there's a typo in the recipe. And then the cake is awful. That's all we know. We don't know how the chef interprets the typo. We don't know what happens in the oven. And we don't actually know how it's exactly connected to how the cake didn't turn out or how you had expected it. A lot of that is unknown. But we can actually systematically try to break this down. And one segment of that journey that we're looking at is how that mutation gets translated and acted upon in your cells. And all of your cells have what's called mRNA. mRNA are the actual instructions that are taken from the DNA. And our work in Single-Cell is looking at how every cell in your body is actually interpreting your DNA slightly differently and what happens when healthy cells are interpreting the DNA instructions and when sick cells are interpreting those directions. And that is a ton of data. I just told you, there's 37 trillion cells. There's different large sets of mRNA in each cell. But the work that we've been funding is looking at how-- first of all, gathering that information. We've been incredibly lucky to be part of a very fast-moving field where we've gone from, in 2017, funding some methods work to now having really not complete, but nearly complete atlases of how the human body works, how flies work, how mice work at the single-cell level and being able to then try to piece together how does that all come together when you're healthy and when you're sick. And the neat thing about the inflection point where we're at in AI is that I can't look at this data and make sense of it. There's just too much of it. And biology is complex. Human bodies are complex. We need this much information. But the use of large language models can help us actually look at that data and gain insights, look at what trends are consistent with health and what trends are unsuspected. And eventually, our hope, through the use of these data sets that we've helped curate and the application of large language models, is to be able to formulate a virtual cell, a cell that's completely built off of the data sets of what we know about the human body, but allows us to manipulate, and learn faster and try new things to help move science and then medicine along. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Do you think we've cataloged the total number of different cell types? Every week, I look at great journals like Cell Nature and Science. And for instance, I saw recently that, using single cell sequencing, they've categorized 18 plus different types of fat cells. We always think of like a fat cell versus a muscle cell. So now, you've got 18 types. Each one is going to express many, many different genes and mRNAs. And perhaps one of them is responsible for what we see in advanced type 2 diabetes, or in other forms of obesity, or where people can't lay down fat cells, which turns out to be just as detrimental in those extreme cases. So now, you've got all these lists of genes. But I always thought of single cell sequencing as necessary, but not sufficient, right? You need the information, but it doesn't resolve the problem. And I think of it more as a hypothesis-generating experiment. OK, so you have all these genes. And you can say, well, this gene is particularly elevated in the diabetic cell type of, let's say, one of these fat cells or muscle cells for that matter, whereas it's not in non-diabetics. So then of the millions of different cells, maybe only five of them differ dramatically. So then you generate a hypothesis. Oh, it's the ones that differ dramatically that are important. But maybe one of those genes, when it's only 50% changed, has a huge effect because of some network biology effect. And so I guess what I'm trying to get to here is how does one meet that challenge. And can AI help resolve that challenge by essentially placing those lists of genes into 10,000 hypotheses? Because I'll tell you that the graduate students and postdocs in my lab get a chance to test one hypothesis at a time. PRISCILLA CHAN: I know. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And that's really the challenge, let alone one lab. And so for those that are listening to this-- and hopefully, it's not getting outside the scope of standard understanding or the understanding we've generated here. But what I'm basically saying is, you have to pick at some point. More data always sounds great. But then how do you decide what to test? PRISCILLA CHAN: So no, we don't know all the cell types. I think one thing that was really exciting when we first launched this work was cystic fibrosis. Cystic fibrosis is caused by mutation in CFTR. That's pretty well known. It affects a certain channel that makes it hard for mucus to be cleared. That's the basics of cystic fibrosis. When I went to medical school, it was taught as fact. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So their lungs fill up with fluid. These are people who are carrying around sacks of fluid filling up. PRISCILLA CHAN: Yep. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I've worked with people like that. And they have to literally dump the fluid out. PRISCILLA CHAN: Exactly. ANDREW HUBERMAN: They can't run or do intense exercise. Life is shorter. PRISCILLA CHAN: Life is shorter. And when we applied single-cell methodologies to the lungs, they discovered an entirely new cell type that actually is affected by a mutation in the CF mutation, in cystic fibrosis mutation, that actually changes the paradigm of how we think about cystic fibrosis. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Amazing. PRISCILLA CHAN: [? Just ?] [? unknown. ?] So I don't think we know all the cell types. I think we'll continue to discover them. And we'll continue to discover new relationships between cell and disease, which leads me to the second example I want to bring up, is this large data set that the entire scientific community has built around single cell. It's starting to allow us to say this mutation, where is it expressed? What types of cell types it's expressed in? And we actually have built a tool at CZI called CELLxGENE, where you can put in the mutation that you're interested in. And it gives you a heat map of cross cell types of which cell types are expressing the gene that you're interested in. And so then you can start looking at, OK, if I look at gene X and I know it's related to heart disease-- but if you look at the heat map, it's also spiking in the pancreas. That allows you to generate a hypothesis. Why? And what happens when this gene is mutated and the function of your pancreas? Really exciting way to look and ask questions differently. And you can also imagine a world where if you're trying to develop a therapy, a drug, and the goal is to treat the function in the heart, but you know that it's also really active in the pancreas again. So is there going to be an unexpected side effect that you should think about as you're bringing this drug to clinical trials? So it's an incredibly exciting tool and one that's only going to get better as we get more and more sophisticated ways to analyze the data. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I must say, I love that because if I look at the advances in neuroscience over the last 15 years, most of them didn't necessarily come from looking at the nervous system. They came from the understanding that the immune system impacts the brain. Everyone prior to that talked about the brain as an immune-privileged organ. What you just said also bridges the divide between single cells, organs and systems, right? Because ultimately, cells make up organs. Organs make up systems. And they're all talking to one another. And everyone nowadays is familiar with gut-brain axis or the microbiome being so important. But rarely is the discussion between organs discussed, so to speak. So I think it's wonderful. So that tool was generated by CZI. Or CCI funded that tool? MARK ZUCKERBERG: We built that. PRISCILLA CHAN: We built it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: You built it. So is it built by Meta? Is this Meta? MARK ZUCKERBERG: No, no, it has its own engineers. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Got it. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah. They're completely different organizations. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Incredible. And so a graduate student or postdoc who's interested in a particular mutation could put this mutation into this database. That graduate student or postdoc might be in a laboratory known for working on heart, but suddenly find that they're collaborating with other scientists that work on the pancreas, which also is wonderful because it bridges the divide between these fields. Fields are so siloed in science-- not just different buildings, but people rarely talk, unless things like this are happening. PRISCILLA CHAN: I mean, the graduate student is someone that we want to empower because, one, they're the future of science, as you know. And within CELLxGENE, if you put in the gene you're interested in and it shows you the heat map, we also will pull up the most relevant papers to that gene. And so read these things. ANDREW HUBERMAN: That's fantastic. As we all know, quality nutrition influences, of course, our physical health, but also our mental health and our cognitive functioning-- our memory, our ability to learn new things and to focus. And we know that one of the most important features of high quality nutrition is making sure that we get enough vitamins and minerals from high quality, unprocessed, or minimally processed sources, as well as enough probiotics, and prebiotics and fiber to support basically all the cellular functions in our body, including the gut microbiome. Now, I, like most everybody try to get optimal nutrition from whole foods, ideally mostly from minimally processed or non processed foods. However, one of the challenges that I and so many other people face is getting enough servings of high quality fruits and vegetables per day, as well as fiber and probiotics that often accompany those fruits and vegetables. That's why, way back in 2012, long before I ever had a podcast, I started drinking AG1. And so I'm delighted that AG1 is sponsoring the Huberman Lab podcast. The reason I started taking AG1 and the reason I still drink AG1 once or twice a day is that it provides all of my foundational nutritional needs. That is, it provides insurance that I get the proper amounts of those vitamins, minerals, probiotics and fiber to ensure optimal mental health, physical health and performance. If you'd like to try AG1, you can go to drinkag1.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They're giving away five free travel packs plus a year's supply of vitamin D3 K2. Again, that's drinkag1.com/huberman to claim that special offer. MARK ZUCKERBERG: I just think going back to your question from before are there going to be more cell types that get discovered? I mean, I assume so, right? I mean, no catalog of this stuff is ever-- it doesn't seem like we're ever done. we keep on finding more. But I think that that gets to one of the things that I think are the strengths of modern LLMs, is the ability to imagine different states that things can be in. So from all the work that we've done and funded on the Human Cell Atlas, there is a large corpus of data that you can now train a kind of large-scale model on. And one of the things that we're doing at CZI, which I think is pretty exciting, is building what we think is one of the largest non-profit life sciences AI clusters. It's on the order of 1,000 GPUs. And it's larger than what most people have access to in academia that you can do serious engineering work on. And by basically training a model with all of the Human Cell Atlas Data and a bunch of other inputs as well, we think you'll be able to basically imagine all of the different types of cells and all the different states that they can be in, and when they're healthy and diseased, and how they'll interact with different-- interact with each other, interact with different potential drugs. But I think the state of LLMs, I think this is where it's helpful to understand-- have a good understanding and be grounded in the modern state of AI. I mean, these things are not foolproof. I mean, one of the flaws of modern LLMs is they hallucinate. So the question is, how do you make it so that that can be an advantage rather than a disadvantage? And I think the way that it ends up being an advantage is when they help you imagine a bunch of states that someone could be in, but then you, as the scientist or engineer, go and validate that those are true, whether they're solutions to how a protein can be folded or possible states that a cell could be in when it's interacting with other things. But we're not yet at the state with AI that you can just take the outputs of these things as gospel and run from there. But they are very good, I think as you said, hypothesis generators or possible solution generators that then you can go validate. So I think that that's a very powerful thing that we can basically-- building on the first five years of science work around the Human Cell Atlas and all the data that's been built out-- carry that forward into something that I think is going to be a very novel tool going forward. And that's the type of thing that I think we're set up to do well. I mean, you had this exchange a little while back about funding levels and how CZI is just a drop in the bucket compared to NIH. The thing that I think we can do that's different is funding some of these longer term, bigger projects. It is hard to galvanize the and pull together the energy to do that. And it's a lot of what most science funding is, relatively small projects that are exploring things over relatively short time horizons. And one of the things that we try to do is build these tools over 5, 10, 15-year periods. They're often projects that require hundreds of millions of dollars of funding and world-class engineering teams and infrastructure to do. And that, I think, is a pretty cool contribution to the field that I think is-- there aren't as many other folks who are doing that kind of thing. But that's one of the reasons why I'm personally excited about the virtual cell stuff because it just this perfect intersection of all the stuff that we've done in single cell, the previous collaborations that we've done with the field and bringing together the industry and AI expertise around this. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah, I completely agree that the model of science that you're putting together with CZI isn't just unique from NIH, but it's extremely important that the independent investigator model is what's driven the progression of Science in this country and, to some extent, in Northern Europe for the last 100 years. And it's wonderful, on the one hand, because it allows for that image we have of a scientist tinkering away or the people in their lab, and then the eurekas. And that hopefully translates to better human health. But I think, in my opinion, we've moved past that model as the most effective model or the only model that should be explored. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah, I just think it's a balance. You want that. But you want to empower those people. I think that that's these tools empower those folks. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Sure. And there are mechanisms to do that, like NIH. But it's hard to do collaborative science. It's interesting that we're sitting here not far-- because I grew up right near here as well. I'm not far from the garage model of tech, right? The Hewlett-Packard model, not far from here at all. And the idea was the tinkerer in the garage, the inventor. And then people often forget that to implement all the technologies they discovered took enormous factories and warehouses. So there's a similarity there to Facebook, Meta, et cetera. But I think, in science, we imagine that the scientists alone in their laboratory and those eureka moments. But I think, nowadays, the big questions really require extensive collaboration and certainly tool development. And one of the tools that you keep coming back to is these LLMs, these large language models. And maybe you could just elaborate, for those that aren't familiar. What is a large language model? For the uninformed, what is it? And what does it allow us to do that different, other types of AI don't allow? Or more importantly, perhaps what does it allow us to do that a bunch of really smart people, highly informed in a given area of science, staring at the data-- what can it do that they can't do? MARK ZUCKERBERG: Sure. So I think a lot of the progression of machine learning has been about building systems, neural networks or otherwise, that can basically make sense and find patterns in larger and larger amounts of data. And there was a breakthrough a number of years back that some folks at Google actually made called this transformer model architecture. And it was this huge breakthrough because before then there was somewhat of a cap where if you fed more data into a Neural Network past some point, it didn't really glean more insights from it, whereas transformers just-- we haven't seen the end of how big that can scale to yet. I mean, I think that there's a chance that we run into some ceiling. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So it never asymptotes? MARK ZUCKERBERG: We haven't observed it yet. But we just haven't built big enough systems yet. So I would guess that-- I don't know. I think that this is actually one of the big questions in the AI field today, is basically, are transformers and are the current model architectures sufficient? If you just build larger and larger clusters, do you eventually get something that's like human intelligence or super intelligence? Or is there some kind of fundamental limit to this architecture that we just haven't reached yet? And once we get a little bit further in building them out, then we'll reach that. And then we'll need a few more leaps before we get to the level of AI that I think will unlock a ton of really futuristic and amazing things. But there's no doubt that even just being able to process the amount of data that we can now with this model architecture has unlocked a lot of new use cases. And the reason why they're called large language models is because one of the first uses of them is people basically feed in all of the language from, basically, the world wide web. And you can think about them as basically prediction machines. You put in a prompt. And it can basically predict a version of what should come next. So you type in a headline for a news story. And it can predict what it thinks the story should be. Or you could train it so that it could be a chat, bot where, OK, if you're prompted with this question, you, can get this response. But one of the interesting things is it turns out that there's actually nothing specific to using human language in it. So if instead of feeding it human language, if you use that model architecture for a network and instead you feed it all of the Human Cell Atlas Data, then if you prompt it with a state of a cell, it can spit out different versions of how that cell can interact or different states that the cell could be in next when it interacts with different things. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Does it have to take a genetics class? So for instance, if you give it a bunch of genetics data, do you have to say, hey, by the way, and then you give it a genetics class so it understands that you've got DNA, RNA, mRNA, and proteins? MARK ZUCKERBERG: No, I think that the basic nature of all these machine learning techniques is they're basically pattern recognition systems. So there are these very deep statistical machines that are very efficient at finding patterns. So it's not actually-- you don't need to teach a language model that's trying to speak a language a lot of specific things about that language either. You just feed it in a bunch of examples. And then let's say you teach it about something in English, but then you also give it a bunch of examples of people speaking Italian. It'll actually be able to explain the thing that it learned in English in Italian. So the crossover and just the pattern recognition is the thing that is pretty profound and powerful about this. But it really does apply to a lot of different things. Another example in the scientific community has been the work that AlphaFold, basically the folks at DeepMind, have done on protein folding. It's just basically a lot of the same model architecture. But instead of language, there they fold they fed in all of these protein data. And you can give it a state. And it can spit out solutions to how those proteins get folded. So it's very powerful. I don't think we know yet, as an industry, what the natural limits of it are. I think that that's one of the things that's pretty exciting about the current state. But it's certainly allows you to solve problems that just weren't solved with the generation of machine learning that came before it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It sounds like CZI is moving a lot of work that was just done in vitro, in dishes, and in vivo, in living organisms, model organisms are humans, to in silico, as we say. So do you foresee a future where a lot of biomedical research, certainly the work of CZI included, is done by machines? I mean, obviously, it's much lower cost. And you can run millions of experiments, which, of course, is not to say that humans are not going to be involved. But I love the idea that we can run experiments in silico en masse. PRISCILLA CHAN: I think in silico experiments are going to be incredibly helpful to test things quickly, cheaply and just unleash a lot of creativity. I do think you need to be very careful about making sure it still translates and matches the humans. One thing that's funny in basic science is we've basically cured every single disease in mice. We know what's going on when they have a number of diseases because they're used as a model organism. But they are not humans. And a lot of times, that research is relevant, but not directly one-to-one translatable to humans. So you just have to be really careful about making sure that it actually works for humans. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Sounds like what CZI is doing is actually creating a new field. As I'm hearing all of this, I'm thinking, OK, this transcends immunology department, cardiothoracic surgery, I mean neuroscience. I mean, the idea of a new field, where you certainly embrace the realities of universities and laboratories because that's where most of the work that you're funding is done. Is that right? MARK ZUCKERBERG: Mm-hmm. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So maybe we need to think about what it means to do science differently. And I think that's one of the things that's most exciting. Along those lines, it seems that bringing together a lot of different types of people at different major institutions is going to be especially important. So I know that the initial CZI Biohub, gratefully, included Stanford. We'll put that first in the list, but also UCSF, forgive me. I have many friends at UCSF and also Berkeley. But there are now some additional institutions involved. So maybe you could talk about that, and what motivated the decision to branch outside the Bay Area and why you selected those particular additional institutions to be included. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Well, I'll just say it. A big part of why we wanted to create additional biohubs is we were just so impressed by the work that the folks who were running the first biohub did. PRISCILLA CHAN: Yeah. And you should walk through the work of the Chicago Biohub and the New York Biohub that we just announced. But I think it's actually an interesting set of examples that balance the limits of what you want to do with physical material engineering and where things are purely biological because the Chicago team is really building more sensors to be able to understand what's going on in your body. But that's more of a physical kind of engineering challenge, whereas the New York team-- we basically talk about this as like a cellular endoscope of being able to have an immune cell or something that can go and understand, what's the thing that's going on in your body? But it's not a physical piece of hardware. It's a cell that you can basically have just go report out on different things that are happening inside the body. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Oh, so making the cell the the microscope. PRISCILLA CHAN: Totally. MARK ZUCKERBERG: And then eventually actually being able to act on it. But I mean, you should go into more detail on all this. PRISCILLA CHAN: So a core principle of how we think about biohubs is that it has to be-- when we invited proposals, it has to be at least three institutions, so really breaking down the barrier of a single university, oftentimes asking for the people designing the research aim to come from all different backgrounds and to explain why that the problem that they want to solve requires interdisciplinary, inter-university, institution collaboration to actually make happen. We just put that request for proposal out there with our San Francisco Biohub as an example, where they've done incredible work in single cell biology and infectious disease. And we got-- I want to say-- like 57 proposals from over 150 institutions. A lot of ideas came together. And we were so, so excited that we've been able to launch Chicago and New York. Chicago is a collaboration between UIUC, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, and University of Chicago and Northwestern. Obviously, these universities are multifaceted. But if I were to describe them by their stereotypical strength, Northwestern has an incredible medical system and hospital system. University of Chicago brings to the table incredible basic science strengths. University of Illinois is a computing powerhouse. And so they came together and proposed that they were going to start thinking about cells in tissue, so one of the layers that you just alluded to. So how do the cells that we know behave and act differently when they come together as a tissue? And one of the first tissues that they're starting with is skin. So they've already been able to, as a collaboration under the leadership, of Shana Kelly design engineered skin tissue. The architecture looks the same as what's in you and I. And what they've done is built these super, super thin sensors. And they embed these sensors throughout the layers of this engineered tissue. And they read out the data. They want to see what these cells are secreting, how these cells talk to each other and what happens when these cells get inflamed. Inflammation is an incredibly important process that drives 50% of all deaths. And so this is another disease-agnostic approach. We want to understand inflammation. And they're going to get a ton of information out from these sensors that tell you what happens when something goes awry because right now we can say, when you have an allergic reaction, your skin gets red and puffy. But what is the earliest signal of that? And these sensors can look at the behaviors of these cells over time. And then you can apply a large language model to look at the earliest statistically significant changes that can allow you to intervene as early as possible. So that's what Chicago's doing. They're starting in the skin cells. They're also looking at the neuromuscular junction, which is the connection between where a neuron attaches to a muscle and tells the muscle how to behave-- super important in things like ALS, but also in aging. The slowed transmission of information across that neuromuscular junction is what causes old people to fall. Their brain cannot trigger their muscles to react fast enough. And so we want to be able to embed these sensors to understand how these different, interconnected systems within our bodies work together. In New York, they're doing a related, but equally exciting project where they're engineering individual cells to be able to go in and identify changes in a human body. So what they'll do is-- they're calling it-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: It's wild. I mean, I love that. I mean, this is-- I don't want to go on a tangent. But for those that want to look it up adaptive optics, there's a lot of distortion and interference when you try and look at something really small or really far away. And really smart physicists figured out, well, use the interference as part of the microscope. Make those actually lenses of the microscope. MARK ZUCKERBERG: We should talk about imaging separately after you talk about the New York Biohub. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It's extremely clever, along those lines. It's not intuitive. But then when you hear it, it's like it makes so much sense. It's not immediately intuitive. Make the cells that already can navigate to tissues or embed themselves in tissues be the microscope within that tissue. I love it. PRISCILLA CHAN: Totally. The way that I explain this to my friends and my family is this is Fantastic Voyage, but real life. We are going into the human body. And we're using the immune cells, which are privileged and already working to keep your body healthy, and being able to target them to examine certain things. So you can engineer an immune cell to go in your body and look inside your coronary arteries and say, are these arteries healthy? Or are there plaques? Because plaques lead to blockage, which lead to heart attacks. And the cell can then record that information and report it back out. That's the first half of what the New York Biohub is going to do. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Fantastic. PRISCILLA CHAN: The second half is can you then engineer the cells to go do something about it. Can I then tell a different cell, immune cell that is able to transport in your body to go in and clean that up in a targeted way? And so it's incredibly exciting. They're going to study things that are immune privilege, that your immune system normally doesn't have access to-- things like ovarian and pancreatic cancer. They'll also look at a number of neurodegenerative diseases, since the immune system doesn't presently have a ton of access into the nervous system. But it's both mind blowing and it feels like sci-fi. But science is actually in a place where if you really push a group of incredibly qualified scientists say, could you do this if given the chance, the answer is like probably. Give us enough time, the bright team and resources. It's doable. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah. I mean, it's a 10 to 15-year project. But it's awesome, engineered cells, yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I love the optimism. And the moment you said make the cell the microscope, so to speak, I was like yes, yes and yes. It just makes so much sense. What motivated the decision to do the work of CZI in the context of existing universities as opposed to-- there's still some real estate up in Redwood City where there's a bunch of space to put biotech companies and just hiring people from all backgrounds and saying, hey, have at it and doing this stuff from scratch? I mean, it's a very interesting decision to do this in the context of an existing framework of graduate students that need to do their thesis and get a first author paper because there's a whole set of structures within academia that I think both facilitate, but also limit the progression of science. That independent investigator model that we talked about a little bit earlier, it's so core to the way science has been done. This is very different and frankly sounds far more efficient, if I'm to be completely honest. And we'll see if I renew my NIH funding after saying that. But I think we all want the same thing. As scientists and as humans, we want to understand the way we work. And we want healthy people to persist to be healthy. And we want sick people to get healthy. I mean, that's really ultimately the goal. It's not super complicated. It's just hard to do. PRISCILLA CHAN: So the teams at the biohub are actually independent of the universities. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Got it. PRISCILLA CHAN: So each biohub will probably have in total maybe 50 people working on deep efforts. However, it's an acknowledgment that not all of the best scientists who can contribute to this area are actually going to, one, want to leave a university or want to take on the full-time scope of this project. So it's the ability to partner with universities and to have the faculty at all the universities be able to contribute to the overall project, is how the biohub is structured. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Got it. MARK ZUCKERBERG: But a lot of the way that we're approaching CZI is this long-term, iterative project to figure out-- try a bunch of different things, figure out which things produce the most interesting results, and then double down on those in the next five-year push. So we just went through this period where we wrapped up the first five years of the science program. And we tried a lot of different models, all kinds of different things. And it's not that the biohub model-- we don't think it's the best or only model. But we found that it was a really interesting way to unlock a bunch of collaboration and bring some technical resources that allow for this longer term development. And it's not something that is widely being pursued across the rest of the field. So we figured, OK, this is an interesting thing that we can help push on. But I mean, yeah, we do believe in the collaboration. But I also think that we come at this with-- we don't think that the way that we're pursuing this is the only way to do this or the way that everyone should do it. We're pretty aware of what is the rest of the ecosystem and how we can play a unique role in it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It feels very synergistic with the way science is already done and also fills an incredibly important niche that, frankly, wasn't filled before. Along the lines of implementation-- so let's say your large language models combined with imaging tools reveal that a particular set of genes acting in a cluster-- I don't know-- set up an organ crash. Let's say the pancreas crashes at a particular stage of pancreatic cancer. I mean, it's still one of the most deadliest of the cancers. And there are others that you certainly wouldn't want to get. But that's among the ones you wouldn't want to get the most. So you discover that. And then and the idea is that, OK, then AI reveals some potential drug targets that then bear out in vitro, in a dish and in a mouse model. How is the actual implementation to drug discovery? Or maybe this target is druggable, maybe it's not. Maybe it requires some other approach-- laser ablation approach or something. We don't know. But ultimately, is CZI going to be involved in the implementation of new therapeutics? Is that the idea? MARK ZUCKERBERG: Less so. PRISCILLA CHAN: Less so. This is where it's important to work in an ecosystem and to know your own limitations. There are groups, and startups and companies that take that and bring it to translation very effectively. I would say the place where we have a small window into that world is actually our work with rare disease groups. We have, through our Rare As One portfolio, funded patient advocates to create rare disease organizations where patients come together and actually pool their collective experience. They build bioregistries, registries of their natural history. And they both partner with researchers to do the research about their disease and with drug developers to incentivize drug developers to focus on what they may need for their disease. And one thing that's important to point out is that rare diseases aren't rare. There are over 7,000 rare diseases and collectively impact many, many individuals. And I think the thing that's, from a basic science perspective, the incredibly fascinating thing about rare diseases is that they're actually windows to how the body normally should work. And so there are often mutations that when genes that when they're mutated cause very specific diseases, but that tell you how the normal biology works as well. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Got it. So you discussed basically the major goals and initiatives of the CZI for the next, say, 5 to 10 years. And then beyond that, the targets will be explored by biotech companies. They'll grab those targets, and test them and implement them. MARK ZUCKERBERG: There's also, I think, been a couple of teams from the initial biohub that were interested in spinning out ideas into startups. So even though it's not a thing that we're going to pursue because we're a philanthropy, we want to enable the work that gets done to be able to get turned into companies and things that other people go take and run towards building ultimately therapeutics. So that's another zone. But that's not a thing that we're going to do. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Got it. I gather you're both optimists. Yeah? Is that part of what brought you together? Forgive me for switching to a personal question. But I love the optimism that seems to sit at the root of the CZI. PRISCILLA CHAN: I will say that we are incredibly hopeful people. But it manifests in different ways between the two of us. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah. PRISCILLA CHAN: How would you describe your optimism versus mine? It's not a loaded question. MARK ZUCKERBERG: I don't know. Huh. I mean, I think I'm more probably technologically optimistic about what can be built. And I think you, because of your focus as an actual doctor, have more of a sense of how that's going to affect actual people in their lives, whereas, for me, it's like-- I mean, a lot of my work is we touch a lot of people around the world. And the scale is immense. And I think, for you, it's like being able to improve the lives of individuals, whether it's students at any of the schools that you've started or any of the stuff that we've supported through the education work, which isn't the goal here, or just being able to improve people's lives in that way I think is the thing that I've seen be super passionate about. I don't know. Do you agree with that characterization? I'm trying I'm trying to-- PRISCILLA CHAN: Yeah, I agree with that. I think that's very fair. And I'm sort of giggling to myself because in day-to-day life, as life partners, our relative optimism comes through as Mark just is overly optimistic about his time management and will get engrossed in interesting ideas. MARK ZUCKERBERG: I'm late. PRISCILLA CHAN: And he's late. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Physicians are very punctual, yeah. PRISCILLA CHAN: And because he's late, I have to channel Mark is an optimist whenever I'm waiting for him. MARK ZUCKERBERG: That's such a nice way of-- OK, I'll start using that. PRISCILLA CHAN: That's what I think when I'm in the driveway with the kids waiting for you. I'm like, Mark is an optimist. And so his optimism translates to some tardiness, whereas I'm a how is this going to happen like. I'm going to open a spreadsheet. I'm going to start putting together a plan and pulling together all the pieces, calling people to bring something to life. MARK ZUCKERBERG: But it is one of my favorite quotes, that is optimists tend to be successful and pessimists tend to be right. And yeah, I mean, I think it's true in a lot of different aspects of life. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Who said that? Did you say that, Mark Zuckerberg? MARK ZUCKERBERG: No, I did not. PRISCILLA CHAN: Absolutely not. MARK ZUCKERBERG: No, no, no. I like it. I did not invent it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: We'll give it to you. We'll put it out there. MARK ZUCKERBERG: No, no, no. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Just kidding, just kidding. MARK ZUCKERBERG: But I do think that there's really something to it, right? I mean, if you're discussing any idea, there's all these reasons why it might not work. And those reasons are probably true. The people who are stating them probably have some validity to it. But the question is, is that the most productive way to view the world? Across the board, I think the people who tend to be the most productive and get the most done-- you kind of need to be optimistic because if you don't believe that something can get done, then why would you go work on it? ANDREW HUBERMAN: The reason I ask the question is that these days we hear a lot about the future is looking so dark in these various ways. And you have children. So you have families. And you are a family, excuse me. And you also have families independently that are now merged. But I love the optimism behind the CZI because, behind all this, there's a set of big statements on the wall. One, the future can be better than the present, in terms of treating disease, maybe even, you said, eliminating diseases, all diseases. I love that optimism. And there's a tractable path to do it. We're going to put literally money, and time, and energy, and people, and technology and AI behind that. And so I have to ask, was having children a significant modifier in terms of your view of the future? Like wow, you hear all this doom and gloom. What's the future going to be like for them? Did you sit back and think, what would it look like if there was a future with no diseases? Is that the future, we want our children in? I mean, I'm voting a big yes. So we're not we're not going to debate that at all. But was having children an inspiration for the CZI in some way? MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah. So PRISCILLA CHAN: I think my answer to that-- I would dial backwards for me. And I'll just tell a very brief story about my family. I'm the daughter of Chinese-Vietnamese refugees. My parents and grandparents were boat people, if you remember people left Vietnam during the war in these small boats into the South China Sea. And there were stories about how these boats would sink with whole families on them. And so my grandparents, both sets of grandparents who knew each other, decided that there was a better future out there. And they were willing to take risks for it. But they were afraid of losing all of their kids. My dad is one of six. My mom is one of 10. And so they decided that there was something out there in this bleak time. And they paired up their kids, one from each family, and sent them out on these little boats before the internet, before cell phones, and just said, we'll see you on the other side. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Wow. PRISCILLA CHAN: And the kids were between the ages of like 10 to 25, so young kids. My mom was a teenager, early teen when this happened. And everyone made it. And I get to sit here and talk to you. So how could I not believe that better is possible? And like I hope that that's in my epigenetics somewhere and that I carry on. ANDREW HUBERMAN: That is a spectacular story. PRISCILLA CHAN: Isn't that wild? ANDREW HUBERMAN: It is spectacular. PRISCILLA CHAN: How can I be a pessimist with that? ANDREW HUBERMAN: I love it. And I so appreciate that you became a physician because you're now bringing that optimism, and that epigenetic understanding, and cognitive understanding and emotional understanding to the field of medicine. So I'm grateful to the people that made that decision. PRISCILLA CHAN: Yeah. I've always known that story. But you don't understand how wild that feels until you have your own child. And you're like, well, I can't even-- I refuse to let her use glass bottles only or something like that. And you're like, oh my God, the risk and the willingness of my grandparents to believe in something bigger and better is just astounding. And our own children give it a sense of urgency. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Again, a spectacular story. And you're sending knowledge out into the fields of science and bringing knowledge into the fields of science. And I love this. We'll see you on the other side. I'm confident that it will all come back. Well, thank you so much for that. Mark, you have the opportunity to talk about-- did having kids change your worldview? MARK ZUCKERBERG: It's really tough to beat that story. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It is tough to beat that story. And they are also your children. So in this case, you get two for the price of one, so to speak. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Having children definitely changes your time horizon. So I think that that's one thing. There are all these things that I think we had talked about, for as long as we've known each other, that you eventually want to go do. But then it's like, oh, we're having kids. We need to get on this, right? So I think that there's-- PRISCILLA CHAN: That was actually one of the checklists, the baby checklist before the first. MARK ZUCKERBERG: It was like, the baby's coming. We have to start CZI. PRISCILLA CHAN: Truly. MARK ZUCKERBERG: I'm like sitting in the hospital delivery room finishing editing the letter that we were going to publish to announce the work. PRISCILLA CHAN: Some people think that is an exaggeration. It was not. We really were editing the final draft. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Birthed CZI before you birthed the human child. Well, it's an incredible Initiative. I've been following it since its inception. And it's already been tremendously successful. And everyone in the field of science-- and I have a lot of communication with those folks-- feels the same way. And the future is even brighter for it, it's clear. And thank you for expanding to the Midwest and New York. And we're all very excited to see where all of this goes. I share in your optimism. And thank you for your time today. PRISCILLA CHAN: Yeah, thank you. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Thank you. A lot more to do. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I'd like to take a quick break and thank our sponsor, InsideTracker. InsideTracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you reach your health goals. I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test. Now, a major problem with a lot of blood tests out there, however, is that you get information back about metabolic factors, lipids, and hormones and so forth. But you don't know what to do with that information. With InsideTracker, they make it very easy because they have a personalized platform that allows you to see the levels of all those things-- metabolic factors, lipids, hormones, et cetera. But it gives you specific directives that you can follow that relate to nutrition, behavioral modification, supplements, et cetera that can help you bring those numbers into the ranges that are optimal for you. If you'd like to try InsideTracker, you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman to get 20% off any of InsideTracker's plans. Again, that's insidetracker.com/huberman. And now for my discussion with Mark Zuckerberg. Slight shift of topic here-- you're extremely well-known for your role in technology development. But by virtue of your personal interests and also where Meta technology interfaces with mental health and physical health, you're starting to become synonymous with health, whether you realize it or not. Part of that is because there's posts, footage of you rolling jiu jitsu. You won a jiu jitsu competition recently. You're doing other forms of martial arts, water sports, including surfing, and on and on. So you're doing it yourself. But maybe we could just start off with technology and get this issue out of the way first, which is that I think many people assume that technology, especially technology that involves a screen, excuse me, of any kind is going to be detrimental to our health. But that doesn't necessarily have to be the case. So could you explain how you see technology meshing with, inhibiting, or maybe even promoting physical and mental health? MARK ZUCKERBERG: Sure. I mean, I think this is a really important topic. The research that we've done suggests that it's not all good or all bad. I think how you're using the technology has a big impact on whether it is basically a positive experience for you. And even within technology, even within social media, there's not one type of thing that people do. I think, at its best, you're forming meaningful connections with other people. And there's a lot of research that basically suggests that it's the relationships that we have and the friendships that bring the most happiness in our lives and, at some level, end up even correlating with living a longer and healthier life because that grounding that you have in community ends up being important for that. So I think that aspect of social media, which is the ability to connect with people, to understand what's going on in people's lives, have empathy for them, communicate what's going on with your life, express that, that's generally positive. There are ways that it can be negative, in terms of bad interactions, things like bullying, which we can talk about because there's a lot that we've done to basically make sure that people can be safe from that and give people tools and give kids the ability to have the right parental controls. Their parents can oversee that. But that's the interacting with people side. There's another side of all of this, which I think of as just passive consumption, which, at its best, is entertainment. And entertainment is an important human thing, too. But I don't think that that has quite the same association with the long-term well-being and health benefits as being able to help people connect with other people does. And I think, at its worst, some of the stuff we see online-- I think, these days, a lot of the news is just so relentlessly negative that it's just hard to come away from an experience where looking at the news for half an hour and feel better about the world. So I think that there's a mix on this. I think the more that social media is about connecting with people and the more that when you're consuming and using the media part of social media to learn about things that enrich you and can provide inspiration or education as opposed to things that just leave you with a more toxic feeling, that's the balance that we try to get right across our products. And I think we're pretty aligned with the community because, at the end of the day, I mean, people don't want to use a product and come away feeling bad. There's a lot that people talk about-- evaluate a lot of these products in terms of information and utility. But I think it's as important, when you're designing a product, to think about what kind of feeling you're creating with the people who use it, whether that's an aesthetic sense when you're designing hardware, or just what do you make people feel. And generally, people don't want to feel bad, right? That doesn't mean that we want to shelter people from bad things that are happening in the world. But I don't really think that-- it's not what people want for us to just be just showing all this super negative stuff all day long. So we work hard on all these different problems-- making sure that we're helping connect people as best as possible, helping make sure that we give people good tools to block people who might be bullying them, or harass them, or especially for younger folks, anyone under the age of 16 defaults into an experience where their experience is private. We have all these parental tools. So that way, parents can understand what their children are up to in a good balance. And then on the other side, we try to give people tools to understand how they're spending their time. We try to give people tools so that if you're a teen and you're stuck in some loop of just looking at one type of content, we'll nudge you and say, hey, you've been looking at content of this type for a while. How about something else? And here's a bunch of other examples. So I think that there are things that you can do to push this in a positive direction. But I think it just starts with having a more nuanced view of this isn't all good or all bad. And the more that you can make it a positive thing, the better this will be for all the people who use our products. ANDREW HUBERMAN: That makes really good sense. In terms of the negative experience, I agree. I don't think anyone wants a negative experience in the moment. I think where some people get concerned perhaps-- and I think about my own interactions with, say, Instagram, which I use all the time for getting information out, but also consuming information. And I happen to love it. It's where I essentially launched the non-podcast segment of my podcast and continue to. I can think of experiences that are a little bit like highly processed food, where it tastes good at the time. It's highly engrossing. But it it's not necessarily nutritious. And you don't feel very good afterwards. So for me, that would be the little collage of default options to click on in Instagram. Occasionally, I notice-- and this just reflects my failure, not Instagram's, that there are a lot of street fight things, like people beating people up on the street. And I have to say, these have a very strong gravitational pull. I'm not somebody that enjoys seeing violence, per se. But you know I find myself-- I'll click on one of these, like what happened? And I'll see someone get hit. And there's a little melee on the street or something. And those seem to be offered to me a lot lately. And again, this is my fault. It reflects my prior searching experience. But I noticed that it has a bit of a gravitational pull, where I didn't learn anything. It's not teaching me any useful street self-defense skills of any kind. And at the same time, I also really enjoy some of the cute animal stuff. And so I get a lot of those also. So there's this polarized collage that's offered to me that reflects my prior search behavior. You could argue that the cute animal stuff is just entertainment. But actually, it fills me with a feeling, in some cases, that truly delights me. I delight in animals. And we're not just talking about kittens. I mean, animals I've never seen before, interactions between animals I've never seen before that truly delight me. They energize me in a positive way that when I leave Instagram, I do think I'm better off. So I'm grateful for the algorithm in that sense. But I guess, the direct question is, is the algorithm just reflective of what one has been looking at a lot prior to that moment where they log on? Or is it also trying to do exactly what you described, which is trying to give people a good-feeling experience that leads to more good feelings? MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah. I mean, I think we try to do this in a long-term way. I think one simple example of this is we had this issue a number of years back about clickbait news, so articles that would have basically a headline that grabbed your attention, that made you feel like, oh, I need to click on this. And then you click on it. And then the article is actually about something that's somewhat tangential to it. But people clicked on it. So the naive version of this stuff, the 10-year-old version was like, oh, people seem to be clicking on this. Maybe that's good. But it's actually a pretty straightforward exercise to instrument the system to realize that, hey, people click on this, and then they don't really spend a lot of time reading the news after clicking on it. And after they do this a few times, it doesn't really correlate with them saying that they're having a good experience. Some of how we measure this is just by looking at how people use the services. But I think it's also important to balance that by having real people come in and tell us, OK-- we show them, here are the stories that we could have showed you, which of these are most meaningful to you, or would make it so that you have the best experience, and just mapping the algorithm and what we do to that ground truth of what people say that they want. So I think that, through a set of things like that, we really have made large steps to minimize things like clickbait over time. It's not like gone from the internet. But I think we've done a good job of minimizing it on our services. Within that though, I do think that we need to be pretty careful about not being paternalistic about what makes different people feel good. So I mean, I don't know that everyone feels good about cute animals. I mean, I can't imagine that people would feel really bad about it. But maybe they don't have as profound of a positive reaction to it as you just expressed. And I don't know. Maybe people who are more into fighting would look at the street fighting videos-- assuming that they're within our community standards. I think that there's a level of violence that we just don't want to be showing at all. But that's a separate question. But if they are, I mean, then it's like-- I mean, I'm pretty into MMA. I don't get a lot of street fighting videos. But if I did, maybe I'd feel like I was learning something from that. I think at various times in the company's history, we've been a little bit too paternalistic about saying, this is good content, this is bad, you should like this, this is unhealthy for you. And I think that we want to look at the long-term effects. You don't want to get stuck in a short term loop of like, OK, just because you did this today doesn't mean it's what you aspire for yourself over time. But I think, as long as you look at the long-term of what people both say they want and what they do, giving people a fair amount of latitude to like the things that they like, I just think feels like the right set of values to bring to this. Now, of course, that doesn't go for everything. There are things that are truly off limits and things that-- like bullying, for example, or things that are really inciting violence, things like that. I mean, we have the whole community standards around this. But I think, except for those things which I would hope that most people can agree, OK, bullying is bad-- I hope that 100% of people agree with that. And not 100%, maybe 99%. Except for the things that kind of get that very-- that feel pretty extreme and bad like that, I think you want to give people space to like what they want to like. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yesterday, I had the very good experience of learning from the Meta team about safety protections that are in place for kids who are using Meta Platforms. And frankly, I was really positively surprised at the huge number of filter-based tools and just ability to customize the experience so that it can stand the best chance of enriching-- not just remaining neutral, but enriching their mental health status. One thing that came about in that conversation, however, was I realized there are all these tools. But do people really know that these tools exist? And I think about my own experience with Instagram. I love watching Adam Mosseri's Friday Q&As because he explains a lot of the tools that I didn't know existed. And if people haven't seen that, I highly recommend they watch that. I think he takes questions on Thursdays and answers them most every Fridays. So if I'm not aware of the tools without watching that, that exists for adults, how does Meta look at the challenge of making sure that people know that there are all these tools-- I mean, dozens and dozens of very useful tools? But I think most of us just know the hashtag, the tag, the click, stories versus feed. We now know that-- I also post to Threads. I mean, so we know the major channels and tools. But this is like owning a vehicle that has incredible features that one doesn't realize can take you off road, can allow your vehicle to fly. I mean, there's a lot there. So what do you think could be done to get that information out? Maybe this conversation could cue people to [INAUDIBLE].. MARK ZUCKERBERG: I mean, that's part of the reason why I wanted to talk to you about this. I mean, I think most of the narrative around social media is not, OK, all of the different tools that people have to control their experience. It's the narrative of is this just negative for teens or something. And I think, again, a lot of this comes down to how is the experience being tuned. Are people using it to connect in positive ways? And if so, I think it's really positive. So yeah, I mean, I think part of this is we probably just need to get out and talk to people more about it. And then there's an in-product aspect, which is if you're a teen and you sign up, we take you through a pretty extensive experience that tries to outline some of this. But that has limits, too, because when you sign up for a new thing, if you're bombarded with here's a list of features, you're like, OK, I just signed up for this. I don't really understand much about what the service is. Let me go find some people to follow who are my friends on here before I learn about controls to prevent people from harassing me or something. That's why I think it's really important to also show a bunch of these tools in context. So if you're looking at comments, and if you go to delete a comment, or you go to edit something, try to give people prompts in line. It's like, hey, did that you can manage things in these ways around that? Or when you're in the inbox and you're filtering something, remind people in line. So just because of the number of people who use the products and the level of nuance around each of the controls, I think the vast majority of that education, I think, needs to happen in the product. But I do think that through conversations like this and others that we need to be doing, I think we can create a broader awareness that those things exist so that way at least people are primed so that way when those things pop up in the product people, they're like, oh yeah, I knew that there was this control. And here's how I would use that. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I find the restrict function to be very useful, more than the block function in most cases. I do sometimes have to block people. But the restrict function is really useful that you could filter specific comments. You might recognize that someone has a tendency to be a little aggressive. And I should point out that I actually don't really mind what people say to me. But I try and maintain what I call classroom rules in my comment section, where I don't like people attacking other people because I would never tolerate that in the university classroom. I'm not going to tolerate that in the comments section, for instance. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah. And I think that the example that you just used about restrict versus block gets to something about product design that's important, too, which is that block is this very powerful tool that if someone is giving you a hard time and you just want them to disappear from the experience, you can do it. But the design trade-off with that is that in order to make it so that the person is just gone from the experience and that you don't show up to them, they don't show up to you-- inherent to that is that they will have a sense that you blocked them. And that's why I think some stuff like restrict or just filtering, like I just don't want to see as much stuff about this topic-- people like using different tools for very subtle reasons. I mean, maybe you want the content to not show up, but you don't want the person who's posting the content to know that you don't want it to show up. Maybe you don't want to get the messages in your main inbox, but you don't want to tell the person actually that you're not friends or something like that. You actually need to give people different tools that have different levels of power and nuance around how the social dynamics around using them play out in order to really allow people to tailor the experience in the ways that they want. ANDREW HUBERMAN: In terms of trying to limit total amount of time on social media, I couldn't find really good data on this. How much time is too much? I mean, I think it's going to depend on what one is looking at, the age of the user, et cetera. MARK ZUCKERBERG: I agree. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I know that you have tools that cue the user to how long they've been on a given platform. Are there tools to self-regulate-- I'm thinking about the Greek myth of the sirens and people tying themselves to the mast and covering their eyes so that they're not drawn in by the sirens. Is there a function aside from deleting the app temporarily and then reinstalling it every time you want to use it again? Is there a true lockout, self-lockout function where one can lock themselves out of access to the app? MARK ZUCKERBERG: Well, I think we give people tools that let them manage this. And there's the tools that you get to use. And then there's the tools that the parents get to use to basically see how usage works. But yeah, I think that there's different-- I think, for now, we've mostly focused on helping people understand this, and then give people reminders and things like that. It's tough, though, to answer the question that you were talking about before. Is there an amount of time which is too much? Because it does really get to what you're doing. If you fast forward beyond just the apps that we have today to an experience that is like a social experience in the future of the augmented reality glasses or something that we're building, a lot of this is going to be you're interacting with people in the way that you would physically as if you were like hanging out with friends or working with people. But now, they can show up as holograms. And you can feel like you're present right there with them, no matter where they actually are. And the question is, is there too much time to spend interacting with people like that? Well, at the limit, if we can get that experience to be as rich and giving you as good of a sense of presence as you would have if you were physically there with someone, then I don't see why you would want to restrict the amount that people use that technology to any less than what would be the amount of time that you'd be comfortable interacting with people physically, which obviously is not going to be 24 hours a day. You have to do other stuff. You have work. You need to sleep. But I think it really gets to how you're using these things, whereas if what you're primarily using the services for is you're getting stuck in loops reading news or something that is really getting you into a negative mental state, then I don't know. I mean, I think that there's probably a relatively short period of time that maybe that's a good thing that you want to be doing. But again, even then it's not zero because just because news might make you unhappy doesn't mean that the answer is to be unaware of negative things that are happening in the world. I just think that different people have different tolerances for what they can take on that. And I think it's generally having some awareness is probably good, as long as it's not more than you're constitutionally able to take. So I don't know. I try not be too paternalistic about this as our approach. But we want to empower people by giving them the tools, both people and, if you're a teen, your parents to have tools to understand what you're experiencing and how you're using these things, and then go from there. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah. I think it requires of all of us some degree of self-regulation. I like this idea of not being too paternalistic. I mean, it seems like the right way to go. I find myself occasionally having to make sure that I'm not just passively scrolling, that I'm learning. I like foraging for, organizing and dispersing information. That's been my life's career. So I've learned so much from social media. I find great papers, great ideas. I think comments are a great source of feedback. And I'm not just saying that because you're sitting here. I mean, Instagram in particular, but other Meta platforms have been tremendously helpful for me to get science and health information out. One of the things that I'm really excited about, which I only had the chance to try for the first time today, is your new VR platform, the newest Oculus. And then we can talk about the glasses, the Ray-Bans. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Sure. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Those two experiences are still kind of blowing my mind, especially the Ray-Ban glasses. And I have so many questions about this. So I'll resist. But-- MARK ZUCKERBERG: We can get into that. ANDREW HUBERMAN: OK. Well, yeah, I have some experience with VR. My Lab has used VR. Jeremy Bailenson's Lab at Stanford is one of the pioneering labs of VR and mixed reality. I guess they used to call it augmented reality, but now mixed reality. I think what's so striking about the VR that you guys had me try today is how well it interfaces with the real room, let's call it, the physical room. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Physical. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I could still see people. I could see where the furniture was. So I wasn't going to bump into anything. I could see people's smiles. I could see my water on the table while I was doing this what felt like a real martial arts experience, except I wasn't getting hit. Well, I was getting hit virtually. But it's extremely engaging. And yet, on the good side of things, it really bypasses a lot of the early concerns that Bailenson Lab-- again, Jeremy's Lab-- was early to say that, oh, there's a limit to how much VR one can or should use each day, even for the adult brain because it can really disrupt your vestibular system, your sense of balance. All of that seems to have been dealt with in this new iteration of VR. I didn't come out of it feeling dizzy at all. I didn't feel like I was reentering the room in a way that was really jarring. Going into it is obviously, Whoa, this is a different world. But you can look to your left and say, oh, someone just came in the door. Hey, how's it going? Hold on, I'm playing this game, just as it was when I was a kid playing in Nintendo and someone would walk in. It's fully engrossing. But you'd be like, hold on. And you see they're there. So first of all, bravo, incredible. And then the next question is, what do we even call this experience? Because it is truly really mixed. It's a truly mixed reality experience. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah. I mean, mixed reality is the umbrella term that refers to the combined experience of virtual and augmented reality. So augmented reality is what you're eventually going to get with some future version of the smart glasses, where you're primarily seeing the world, but you can put holograms in it. So we'll have a future where you're going to walk into a room. And there are going to be as many holograms as physical objects. If you just think about all the paper, the art, physical games, media, your workstation-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: If we refer to, let's say, an MMA fight, we could just draw it up on the table right here and just see it repeat as opposed to us turning and looking at a screen. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah. I mean, pretty much any screen that exists could be a hologram in the future with smart glasses. There's nothing that actually physically needs to be there for that when you have glasses that can put a hologram there. And it's an interesting thought experiment to just go around and think about, OK, what of the things that are physical in the world need to actually be physical. Your chair does, right? Because you're sitting on it. A hologram isn't going to support you. But like that art on the wall, I mean, that doesn't need to physically be there. So I think that that's the augmented reality experience that we're moving towards. And then we've had these headsets that historically we think about as VR. And that has been something that is like a fully immersive experience. But now, we're getting something that's a hybrid in between the two and capable of both, which is a headset that can do both virtual reality and some of these augmented reality experiences. And I think that that's really powerful, both because you're going to get new applications that allow people to collaborate together. And maybe the two of us are here physically, but someone joins us and it's their avatar there. Or maybe it's some version in the future. You're having a team meeting. And you have some people there physically. And you have some people dialing in. And they're basically like a hologram, there virtually. But then you also have some AI personas that are on your team that are helping you do different things. And they can be embodied as avatars and around the table meeting with you. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Are people are going to be doing first dates that are physically separated? I could imagine that some people would-- is it even worth leaving the house type date? And then they find out. And then they meet for the first time. MARK ZUCKERBERG: I mean, maybe. I think dating has physical aspects to it, too. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Right. Some people might not be-- they want to know whether or not it's worth the effort to head out or not. They want to bridge the divide, right? MARK ZUCKERBERG: It is possible. I mean, I know some of my friends who are dating basically say that in order to make sure that they have a safe experience, if they're going on a first date, they'll schedule something that's shorter and maybe in the middle of the day. So maybe it's coffee. So that way, if they don't like the person, they can just get out before going and scheduling a dinner or a real, full date. So I don't know. Maybe in the future, people will have that experience where you can feel like you're kind of sitting there. And it's and it's even easier, and lighter weight and safer. And if you're not having a good experience, you can just teleport out of there and be gone. But yeah, I think that this will be an interesting question in the future. There are clearly a lot of things that are only possible physically that-- or are so much better physically. And then there are all these things that we're building up that can be digital experiences. But it's this weird artifact of how this stuff has been developed that the digital world and the physical world exist in these completely different planes. When you want to interact with the digital world-- we do it all the time. But we pull out a small screen. Or we have a big screen. And just basically, we're interacting with the digital world through these screens. But I think if we fast forward a decade or more, I think one of the really interesting questions about what is the world that we're going to live in, I think it's going to increasingly be this mesh of the physical and digital worlds that will allow us to feel, A, that the world that we're in is just a lot richer because there can be all these things that people create that are just so much easier to do digitally than physically. But B, you're going to have a real physical sense of presence with these things and not feel like interacting in the digital world is taking you away from the physical world, which today is just so much viscerally richer and more powerful. I think the digital world will be embedded in that and will feel just as vivid in a lot of ways. So that's why I always think-- when you were saying before, you felt like you could look around and see the real room. I actually think there's an interesting kind of philosophical distinction between the real room and the physical room, which historically I think people would have said those are the same thing. But I actually think, in the future, the real room is going to be the combination of the physical world with all the digital artifacts and objects that are in there that you can interact with them and feel present, whereas the physical world is just the part that's physically there. And I think it's possible to build a real world that's the sum of these two that will actually be more profound experience than what we have today. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Well, I was struck by the smoothness of the interface between the VR and the physical room. Your team had me try a-- I guess it was an exercise class in the [INAUDIBLE].. But it was essentially like hitting mitts boxing, so hitting targets boxing. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah, super natural. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Yeah, and it comes at a fairly fast pace that then picks up. It's got some tutorial. It's very easy to use. And it certainly got my heart rate up. And I'm in at least decent shape. And I have to be honest, I've never once desired to do any of these on-screen fitness things. I mean, I can't think of anything more aversive than a-- I don't want to insult any particular products, but riding a stationary bike while looking at a screen pretending I'm on a road outside. I can't think of anything worse for me. MARK ZUCKERBERG: I do like the leaderboard. Maybe I'm just a very competitive person. If you're going to be running on a treadmill, at least give me a leaderboard so I can beat the people who are ahead of me. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I like moving outside and certainly an exercise class or aerobics class, as they used to call them. But the experience I tried today was extremely engaging. And I've done enough boxing to at least know how to do a little bit of it. And I really enjoyed it. It gets your heart rate up. And I completely forgot that I was doing an on-screen experience in part because, I believe, I was still in that physical room. And I think there's something about the mesh of the physical room and the virtual experience that makes it neither of one world or the other. I mean, I really felt at the interface of those. And I certainly got presence, this feeling of forgetting that I was in a virtual experience and got my heart rate up pretty quickly. We had to stop because we were going to start recording. But I would do that for a good 45 minutes in the morning. And there's no amount of money you could pay me truly to look at a screen while pedaling on a bike or running on a treadmill. So again, bravo, I think it's going to be very useful. It's going to get people moving their bodies more, which certainly-- social media, up until now, and a lot of technologies have been accused of limiting the amount of physical activity that both children and adults are engaged in. And we know we need physical activity. You're a big proponent of and practitioner of physical activity. So is this a major goal of Meta, to get people moving their bodies more and getting their heart rates up and so on? MARK ZUCKERBERG: I think we want to enable it. And I think it's good. But I think it comes more from a philosophical view of the world than it is necessarily-- I mean, I don't go into building products to try to shape people's behavior. I believe in empowering people to do what they want and be the best version of themselves that they can be. ANDREW HUBERMAN: So no agenda? MARK ZUCKERBERG: That said, I do believe that there's the previous generation of computers were devices for your mind. And I think that we are not brains and tanks. I think that there's a philosophical view of people of like, OK, you are primarily what you think about or your values or something. It's like, no, you are that and you are a physical manifestation. And people were very physical. And I think building a computer for your whole body and not just for your mind is very fitting with this worldview that the actual essence of you, if you want to be present with another person, if you want to be fully engaged in experience is not just-- it's not just a video conference call that looks at your face and where you can share ideas. It's something that you can engage your whole body. So, yeah I mean, I think being physical is very important to me. I mean, that's a lot of the most fun stuff that I get to do. It's a really important part of how I personally balance my energy levels and just get a diversity of experiences because I could spend all my time running the company. But I think it's good for people to do some different things and compete in different areas or learn different things. And all of that is good. If people want to do really intense workouts with the work that we're doing with Quest or with eventual AR glasses, great. But even if you don't want to do a really intense workout, I think just having a computing environment and platform which is inherently physical captures more of the essence of what we are as people than any of the previous computing platforms that we've had to date. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I was even thinking just of the simple task of getting better range of motion a.k.a. flexibility. I could imagine, inside of the VR experience, leaning into a stretch, standard type of lunge-type stretch, but actually seeing a meter of are you are you approaching new levels of flexibility in that moment where it's actually measuring some kinesthetic elements on the body in the joints, whereas normally, you might have to do that in front of a camera, which then would give you the data on a screen that you'd look at afterwards or hire an expensive coach or looking at form and resistance training. So you're actually lifting physical weights. But it's telling you whether or not you're breaking form. I mean, there's just so much that could be done inside of there. And then my mind just starts to spiral into, wow, this is very likely to transform what we think of as, quote unquote, "exercise." MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah, I think so. I think there's still a bunch of questions that need to get answered. I don't think most people are going to necessarily want to install a lot of sensors or cameras to track their whole body. So we're just over time getting better from the sensors that are on the headsets of being able to do very good hand tracking. So we have this research demo where you now, just with the hand tracking from the headset, you can type. It just projects a little keyboard onto your table. And you can type. And people type like 100 words a minute with that. ANDREW HUBERMAN: With a virtual keyboard? MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah. We're starting to be able to-- using some modern AI techniques, be able to simulate and understand where your torso's position is. Even though you can't always see it, you can see it a bunch of the time. And if you fuse together what you do see with the accelerometer and understanding how the thing is moving, you can kind of understand what the body position is going to be. But some things are still going to be hard. So you mentioned boxing. That one works pretty well because we understand your head position. We understand your hands. And now, we're increasingly understanding your body position. But let's say you want to expand that to Muay Thai or kickboxing. OK. So legs, that's a different part of tracking. That's harder because that's out of the field of view more of the time. But there's also the element of resistance. So you can throw a punch, and retract it, and shadow box and do that without upsetting your physical balance that much. But if you want to throw a roundhouse kick and there's no one there, then, I mean, the standard way that you do it when you're shadowboxing is you basically do a little 360. But I don't know. Is that going to feel great? I mean, I think there's a question about what that experience should be. And then if you want to go even further, if you want to get grappling to work, I'm not even sure how you would do that without having resistance of understanding what the force is applied to you would be. And then you get into, OK, maybe you're going to have some kind of bodysuit that can apply haptics. But I'm not even sure that even a pretty advanced haptic system is going to be able to be quite good enough to simulate the actual forces that would be applied to you in a grappling scenario. So this is part of what's fun about technology, though, is you keep on getting new capabilities. And then you need to figure out what things you can do with them. So I think it's really neat that we can do boxing. And we can do the supernatural thing. And there's a bunch of awesome cardio, and dancing and things like that. And then there's also still so much more to do that I'm excited to get to over time. But it's a long journey. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And what about things like painting, and art and music? I imagine-- of course, different mediums-- I like to draw with pen and pencil. But I could imagine trying to learn how to paint virtually. And of course, you could print out a physical version of that at the end. This doesn't have to depart from the physical world. It could end in the physical world. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Did you see the demo, the piano demo where you-- either you're there with a physical keyboard or it could be a virtual keyboard. But the app basically highlights what keys you need to press in order to play the song. So it's basically like you're looking at your piano. And it's teaching you how to play a song that you choose. ANDREW HUBERMAN: An actual piano? MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: But it's illuminating certain keys in the virtual space. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah. And it could either be a virtual piano or a keyboard if you don't have a piano or keyboard. Or it could use your actual keyboard. So yeah, I think stuff like that is going to be really fascinating for education and expression. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And excuse me, but for broadening access to expensive equipment. I mean, a piano is no small expense. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Exactly. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And it takes up a lot of space and needs to be tuned. You can think of all these things, the kid that has very little income or their family has very little income could learn to play a virtual piano at a much lower cost. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah. And it gets back to the question I was asking before about this thought experiment of how many of the things that we physically have today actually need to be physical. The piano doesn't. Maybe there's some premium where-- maybe it's a somewhat better, more tactile experience to have a physical one. But for people who don't have the space for it, or who can't afford to buy a piano, or just aren't sure that they would want to make that investment at the beginning of learning how to play piano, I think, in the future, you'll have the option of just buying an app or a hologram piano which will be a lot more affordable. And I think that's going to unlock a ton of creativity too because instead of the market for piano makers being constrained to like a relatively small set of experts who have perfected that craft, you're going to have kids or developers all around the world designing crazy designs for potential keyboards and pianos that look nothing like what we've seen before, but maybe bring even more joy or even more fun into the world where you have fewer of these physical constraints. So I think there's going to be a lot of wild stuff to explore. ANDREW HUBERMAN: There's definitely going to be a lot of wild stuff to explore. I just had this idea/image in my mind of what you were talking about merged with our earlier conversation when Priscilla was here. I could imagine a time not too long from now where you're using mixed reality to run experiments in the lab, literally mixing virtual solutions, getting potential outcomes, and then picking the best one to then go actually do in the real world, which is very both financially costly and time-wise costly. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah. I mean, people are already using VR for surgery and education on it. And there's some study that was done that basically tried to do a controlled experiment of people who learned how to do a specific surgery through just the normal textbook and lecture method versus you show the knee and you have it be a large, blown-up model. And people can manipulate it and practice where they would make the cuts. And like the people in that class did better. Yeah, I think that it's going to be profound for a lot of different areas. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And the last example that leaps to mind-- I think social media and online culture has been accused of creating a lot of real world-- let's call it physical world social anxiety for people. But I could imagine practicing a social interaction. Or a kid that has a lot of social anxiety or that needs to advocate for themselves better learning how to do that progressively through a virtual interaction, and then taking that to the real world because, in my very recent experience today, it's so blended now with real experience that the kid that feels terrified of advocating for themselves, or just talking to another human being, or an adult, or being in a new circumstance of a room full of kids, you could really experience that in silico first and get comfortable, let the nervous system attenuate a bit, and then take it into the, quote unquote, "physical world." MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah, I think we'll see experiences like that. I mean, I also think that some of the social dynamics around how people interact in this kind of blended digital world will be more nuanced in other ways. So I'm sure that there will be new anxieties that people develop too, just like teens today need to navigate dynamics around texting constantly that we just didn't have when we were kids. So I think it will help with some things. I think that there will be new issues that hopefully we can help people work through too. But overall, yeah, I think it's going to be really powerful and positive. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Let's talk about the glasses. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Sure. ANDREW HUBERMAN: This was wild. Put on a Ray-Bans-- I like the way they look. They're clear. They look like any other Ray-Ban glasses, except that I could call out to the glasses. I could just say, hey Meta, I want to listen to the Bach variations-- the Goldberg Variations of Bach. And Meta responded. And no one around me could hear. But I could hear with exquisite clarity. And by the way, I'm not getting paid to say any of this. I'm just still blown away by this. Folks, I want a these very badly. I could hear, OK, I'm selecting those now-- or that music now. And then I could hear it in the background. But then I could still have a conversation. So this was neither headphones in nor headphones out. And I could say, wait, pause the music. And it would pause. And the best part was I didn't have to, quote unquote, "leave the room" mentally. I didn't even have to take out a phone. It was all interfaced through this very local environment in and around the head. And as a neuroscientist, I'm fascinated by this because, of course, all of our perceptions-- auditory, visual et cetera-- are occurring inside the casing of this thing we call a skull. But maybe you could comment on the origin of that design for you, the ideas behind that, and where you think it could go because I'm sure I'm just scratching the surface. MARK ZUCKERBERG: The real product that we want to eventually get to is this full augmented reality product in a stylish and comfortable normal glasses form factor. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Not a dorky VR headset, so to speak? MARK ZUCKERBERG: No, I mean-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: Because the VR headset does feel kind of big on the face. MARK ZUCKERBERG: There's going to be a place for that, too, just like you have your laptop and you have your workstation. Or maybe the better analogy is you have your phone and you have your workstation. These AR glasses are going to be like your phone in that you have something on your face. And you will, I think, be able to, if you want, wear it for a lot of the day and interact with it very frequently. I don't think that people are going to be walking around the world wearing VR headsets. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Let's hope. MARK ZUCKERBERG: But yeah, that's certainly not the future that I'm hoping we get to. But I do think that there is a place for having-- because it's a bigger form factor, it has more compute power. So just like your workstation or your bigger computer can do more than your phone can do, there's a place for that when you want to settle into an intense task. If you have a doctor who's doing a surgery, I would want them doing it through the headset not through the phone equivalent or the lower powered glasses. But just like phones are powerful enough to do a lot of things, I think the glasses will eventually get there, too. Now, that said, there's a bunch of really hard technology problems to address in order to be able to get to this point where you can put full holograms in the world. You're basically miniaturizing a supercomputer and putting it into a glasses so that the glasses still look stylish and normal. And that's a really hard technology problem. Making things small is really hard. A holographic display is different from what our industry has optimized for for 30 or 40 years now, building screens. There's a whole industrial process around that goes into phones, and TVs, and computers, and increasingly so many things that have different screens. There's a whole pipeline that's gotten very good at making that kind of screen. And the holographic displays are just a completely different thing because it's not a screen. It's a thing that you can shoot light into through a laser or some other kind of projector. And it can place that as an object in the world. So that's going to need to be this whole other industrial process that gets built up to doing that in an efficient way. So all that said, we're basically taking two different approaches towards building this at once. One is we are trying to keep in mind what is the long-term thing that-- it's not super far off. Within a few years, I think we'll have something that's a first version of this full vision that I'm talking about. I mean, we have something that's working internally that we use as a dev kit. But that one, that's a big challenge. It's going to be more expensive. And it's harder to get all the pieces working. The other approach has been, all right, let's start with what we know we can put into a pair of stylish sunglasses today and just make them as smart as we can. So for the first version, we worked with-- we did this collaboration with Ray-Ban because that's well-accepted. These are well-designed glasses. They're classic. People have used them for decades. For the first version, we got a sensor on the front, so you could capture moments without having to take your phone out of your pocket. So you got photos and videos. You had the speaker and the microphone, so you can listen to music. You could communicate with it. But that was the first version of it. We had a lot of the basics there. But we saw how people used it. And we tuned it. We made the camera twice as good for this new version that we made. The audio is a lot crisper for the use cases that we saw that people actually used, which is-- some of it is listening to music. But a lot of it is people want to take calls on their glasses. They want to listen to podcasts. But the biggest thing that I think is interesting is the ability to get AI running on it, which it doesn't just run on the glasses. It also kind of proxies through your phone. But I mean, with all the advances in LLMs-- we talked about this a bit in the first part of the conversation. Having the ability to have your Meta AI assistant that you can just talk to and basically ask any question throughout the day is-- I think it'd be really fascinating. And like you were saying about how we process the world as people, eventually, I think you're going to want your AI assistant to be able to see what you see and hear what you hear. Maybe not all the time. But you're going to want to be able to tell it to go into a mode where it can see what you see and hear what you hear. And what's the device design that best positions an AI assistant to be able to see what you see and hear what you hear so it can best help you? Well, that's glasses, where it basically has a sensor to be able to see what you see and a microphone that is close to your ears that can hear what you hear. The other design goal is, like you said, to keep you present in the world. So I think one of the issues with phones is they pull you away from what's physically happening around you. And I don't think that the next generation of computing will do that. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I'm chuckling to myself because I have a friend. He's a very well known photographer. And he was laughing about how people go to a concert. And everyone's filming the concert on their phone so that they can be the person that posts the thing. But there are literally millions of other people who posted the exact same thing. But somehow, it feels important to post our unique experience. With glasses, that would essentially smooth that gap completely. You could just worry about it later, download it then. There are issues, I realize, with glasses because they are so seamless with everyday experience, even though you and I aren't wearing them now. It's very common for people to wear glasses-- issues of recording and consent. [INTERPOSING VOICES] ANDREW HUBERMAN: Like if I go to a locker room at my gym, I'm assuming that the people with glasses aren't filming. Whereas right now, because there's a sharp transition when there's a phone in the room and someone's pointing it, people generally say, no phones in locker rooms and recording. So that's just one instance. I mean, there are other instances. MARK ZUCKERBERG: We have the whole privacy light. Did you get-- ANDREW HUBERMAN: I didn't get a chance to explore that. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah. So anytime that it's active, that the camera sensor is active, it's basically pulsing a white bright light. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Got it. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Which is, by the way, more than cameras do. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Right. Someone could be holding a phone. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah. I mean, phones aren't showing a light, bright sensor when you're taking a photo. ANDREW HUBERMAN: People oftentimes will pretend they're texting and they're actually recording. I actually saw an instance of this in a barber shop once, where someone was recording and they were pretending that they were texting. And it was interesting. There was a pretty intense interaction that ensued. And it was like, wow, it's pretty easy for people to feign texting while actually recording. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah. So I think when you're evaluating a risk with a new technology, the bar shouldn't be is it possible to do anything bad. It's does this new technology make it easier to do something bad than what people already had. And I think because you have this privacy light that is just broadcasting to everyone around you, hey, this thing is recording now-- I think that makes it actually less discreet to do it through the glasses than what you could do with a phone already, which I think is basically the bar that we wanted to get over from a design perspective. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Thank you for pointing out that it has the privacy light. I didn't get long enough in the experience to explore all the features. But again, I can think of a lot of uses-- being able to look at a restaurant from the outside and see the menu, get a status on how crowded it is. As much as I love-- I don't want to call out-- let's just say app-based map functions that allow you to navigate and the audio is OK. It's nice to have a conversation with somebody on the phone or in the vehicle. And it'd be great if the road was traced where I should turn. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah, absolutely. ANDREW HUBERMAN: These kinds of things seem like it's going to be straightforward for Meta engineers to create. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah, in a version, we'll have it so it'll also have the holographic display, where it can show you the directions. But I think that there will basically just be different price points that pack different amounts of technology. The holographic display part, I think, is going to be more expensive than doing one that just has the AI, but is primarily communicating with you through audio. So I mean, the current Ray-Ban Meta glasses are $299. I think when we have one that has a display in it, it'll probably be some amount more than that. But it'll also be more powerful. So I think that people will choose what they want to use based on what the capabilities are that they want and what they can afford. But a lot of our goal in building things is we try to make things that can be accessible to everyone. Our game as a company isn't to build things and then charge a premium price for it. We try to build things that then everyone can use, and then become more useful because a very large number of people are using them. So it's just a very different approach. We're not like Apple or some of these companies that just try to make something and then sell it for as much as they can, which, I mean, they're a great company. So I mean, I think that model is fine, too. But our approach is going to be we want stuff that can be affordable so that way everyone in the world can use it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Long lines of health, I think the glasses will also potentially solve a major problem in a real way, which is the following for both children and adults. It's very clear that viewing objects in particular screens up close for too many hours per day leads to myopia. It literally changes the length of length of the eyeball and nearsightedness. And on the positive side, we know, based on some really large clinical trials, that kids who spend-- and adults who spend two hours a day or more out of doors don't experience that and maybe even reverse their myopia. And it has something to do with exposure to sunlight. But it has a lot to do with long view, viewing things at a distance greater than three or four feet away. And with the glasses, I realize, one could actually do digital work out of doors. It could measure and tell you how much time you've spent looking at things up close versus far away. I mean, this is just another example that leaps to mind. But in accessing the visual system, you're effectively accessing the whole brain because it's the only two bits of brain that are outside the cranial vault. So it just seems like putting technology right at the level of the eyes, seeing what the eyes see, has just got to be the best way to go. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah. Well, multimodal, I think, is-- you want the visual sensation. But you also want text or language. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Sure. That all can be brought to the level of the eyes, right? MARK ZUCKERBERG: What do you mean by that? ANDREW HUBERMAN: Well, I mean, I think what we're describing here is essentially taking the phone, the computer, and bringing it all to the level of the eyes. And of course, one would like-- MARK ZUCKERBERG: Oh, Physically at your eyes? ANDREW HUBERMAN: Physically at your eyes, right? MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And one would like more kinesthetic information, as you mentioned before-- where the legs are, maybe even lung function. Hey, have you taken enough steps today? But that all can be-- if it can be figured out on the phone, it can be-- by the phone, it can be figured out by the glasses. But there's additional information there, such as what are you focusing on in your world. How much of your time is spent looking at things far away versus up close? How much social time did you have today? It's really tricky to get that with a phone. If my phone were right in front of us as if we were at a standard lunch nowadays, certainly in Silicon Valley, and then we're peering at our phones, I mean, how much real direct attention and was in the conversation at hand versus something else? You can get issues of where are you placing your attention by virtue of where you're placing your eyes. And I think that information is not accessible with a phone in your pocket or in front of you. Yeah, I mean, a little bit, but not nearly as rich and complete information as one gets when you're really pulling the data from the level of vision and what kids and adults are actually looking at and attending to. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah, yeah. ANDREW HUBERMAN: It seems extremely valuable. You get autonomic information, size of the pupils. So you get information about internal states. MARK ZUCKERBERG: I mean, there's internal sensor and outside. So the sensor on the Ray-Ban Meta glasses is external. So it basically allows you to see what you see-- sorry, the AI system to see what you're seeing. There's a separate set of things which are eye tracking, which are also very powerful for enabling a lot of interfaces. So if you want to just look at something and select it by looking at it with your eyes rather than having to drag a controller over or pick up a hologram or anything like that, you can do that with eye tracking. So that's a pretty profound and cool experience, too, as well as just understanding what you're looking at so that way you're not wasting compute power drawing pixels and high resolution in a part of the world that's going to be in your peripheral vision. So yeah, all of these things, there are interesting design and technology trade-offs, where if you want the external sensor, that's one thing. If you also want the eye tracking, now that's a different set of sensors. Each one of these consumes compute, which consumes battery. They take up more space. So it's like, where are the eye tracking sensors going to be? It's like, well, you want to make sure that the rim of the glasses is actually quite thin because-- I mean, there's a variance of how thick can glasses be before they look more like goggles than glasses. So I think that there's this whole space. And I think people are going to end up choosing what product makes sense for them. Maybe they want something that's more powerful, that has more of the sensors, but it's going to be a little more expensive, maybe like slightly thicker. Or maybe you want a more basic thing that just looks very similar to what Ray-Ban glasses are that people have been wearing for decades but has AI in it and you can capture moments without having to take your phone out and send them to people. In the latest version, we got the ability in to live stream. I think that that's pretty crazy, that now you can be-- going back to your concert case or whatever else you're doing, you can be doing sports or watching your kids play something. And you can be watching. And you can be live streaming it to your family group, so people can see it. I think that stuff is-- I think that's pretty cool, that you basically have a normal looking glasses at this point that can live stream and has an AI assistant. So the stuff is making a lot faster progress in a lot of ways than I would have thought. And I don't know. I think people are going to like this version. But there's a lot more still to do. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I think it's super exciting. And I see a lot of technologies. This one's particularly exciting to me because of how smooth the interface is and for all the reasons that you just mentioned. What's happening with and what can we expect around AI interfaces and maybe even avatars of people within social media? Are we not far off from a day where there are multiple versions of me and you on the internet or people? For instance, I get asked a lot of questions. I don't have the opportunity to respond to all those questions. But with things like ChatGPT, people are trying to generate answers to those questions on other platforms. Will I have the opportunity to soon have an AI version of myself where people can ask me questions about what I recommend for sleep and circadian rhythm, fitness, mental health, et cetera based on content I've already generated that will be accurate so they could just ask my avatar? MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah, this is something that I think a lot of creators are going to want that we're trying to build and I think we'll probably have a version of next year. But there's a bunch of constraints that I think we need to make sure that we get right. So for one, I think it's really important that-- it's not that there's a bunch of versions of you. It's that if anyone is creating an AI assistant version of you, it should be something that you control. I think there are some platforms that are out there today that just let people like make-- I don't know-- an AI bought of me or other figures. And it's like, I don't know. I mean, we have platform policies for-- and for decades, since the beginning of the company at this point, which is almost 20 years, that basically don't allow impersonation. Real identity is like one of the core aspects that our company was started on. You want to authentically be yourself. So yeah, I think if you're almost any creator, being able to engage your community-- and there's just going to be more demand to interact with you than you have hours in the day. So there are both people who out there who would benefit from being able to talk to an AI version of you. And I think you, and other creators, would benefit from being able to keep your community engaged and service that demand that people have to engage with you. But you're going to want to know that that AI version of you or assistant is going to represent you the way that you would want. And there are a lot of things that are awesome about these modern LLMs. But having perfect predictability about how it's going to represent something is not one of the current strengths. So I think that there's some work that needs to get done there. I don't think it needs to be 100% perfect all the time. But you need to have very good confidence, I would say, that it's going to represent you the way that you'd want for you to want to turn it on, which, again, you should have control over whether you turn it on. So we wanted to start in a different place, which I think is a somewhat easier problem, which is creating new characters for AI personas. So that way, it's not-- we built one of the AIs is like a chef. And they can help you come up with things that you could cook and can help you cook them. There's a couple of people that are interested in different types of fitness that can help you plan out your workouts or help with recovery or different things like that. There's an AI that's focused on DIY crafts. There's somebody who's a travel expert that can help you make travel plans or give you ideas. But the key thing about all of these is they're not modeled off of existing people. So they don't have to have 100% fidelity to making sure that they never say something that a real person who they're modeled after would never say because they're just made up characters. So I think that that's a somewhat easier problem. And we actually got a bunch of different well-known people to play those characters because we thought that would make it more fun. So there's like Snoop Dogg is the dungeon master. So you can drop him into a thread and play text-based games. And I do this with my daughter when I tuck her in at night. And she just loves storytelling. And it's like Snoop Dogg, as the dungeon master, will come up with here's what's happening next. And she's like, OK, I turn into a mermaid. And then I like swim across the bay. And I go and find the treasure chest and unlock it. And it's like, and then Snoop Dogg just always will have a next version of the-- a next iteration on the story. So I mean, it's stuff that's fun. But it's not actually Snoop Dogg. He's just the actor who's playing the dungeon master, which makes it more fun. So I think that's probably the right place to start, is you can build versions of these characters that people can interact with doing different things. But I think where you want to get over time is to the place where any creator or any small business can very easily just create an AI assistant that can represent them and interact with your community or customers, if you're a business, and basically just help you grow your enterprise. So I think that's going to be cool. It's a long-term project. I think we'll have more progress on it to report on next year. But I think that's coming. ANDREW HUBERMAN: I'm super excited about it because we hear a lot about the downsides of AI. I mean, I think people are now coming around to the reality that AI is neither good nor bad. It can be used for good or bad. And there are a lot of life-enhancing spaces that it's going to show up and really, really improve the way that we engage socially, what we learn, and that mental health and physical health don't have to suffer and, in fact, can be enhanced by the sorts of technologies we've been talking about. So I know you're extremely busy. I so appreciate the large amount of time you've given me today to sort through all these things. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Yeah, it's been fun. ANDREW HUBERMAN: And to talk with you and Priscilla and to hear what's happening and where things are headed, the future certainly is bright. I share in your optimism. And it's been only strengthened by today's conversation. So thank you so much. And keep doing what you're doing. And on behalf of myself and everyone listening, thank you because, regardless of what people say, we all use these platforms excitedly. And it's clear that there's a ton of intention, and care, and thought about what could be in the positive sense. And that's really worth highlighting. MARK ZUCKERBERG: Awesome, thank you. I appreciate it. ANDREW HUBERMAN: Thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Mark Zuckerberg and Dr. Priscilla Chan. If you're learning from and/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zero-cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five star review. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me, or comments about the podcast, or guests that you'd like me to consider hosting on the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comment section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. Not during today's episode, but on many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab podcast, we discuss supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like enhancing sleep, hormone support, and improving focus. If you'd like to learn more about the supplements discussed on the Huberman Lab podcast, you can go to live momentous-- spelled O-U-S-- so livemomentous.com/huberman. If you're not already following me on social media, it's hubermanlab on all social media platforms. So that's Instagram, Twitter-- now called X-- Threads, Facebook, LinkedIn. And on all those places, I discuss science and science-related tools, some of which overlaps with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the content on the Huberman Lab podcast. So again, it's hubermanlab on all social media platforms. If you haven't already subscribed to our monthly Neural Network Newsletter, the Neural Network Newsletter is a completely zero-cost newsletter that gives you podcast summaries as well as toolkits in the form of brief PDFs. We have toolkits related to optimizing sleep, regulating dopamine, deliberate cold exposure, fitness, mental health, learning, and neuroplasticity and much more. Again, it's completely zero-cost to sign up. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go over to the Menu tab, scroll down to newsletter and supply your email. I should emphasize that we do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Mark Zuckerberg and Dr. Priscilla Chan. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [MUSIC PLAYING]

========================================

--- Video 176 ---
Video ID: FeRgqJVALMQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FeRgqJVALMQ
Title: Dr. Lisa Feldman Barrett: How to Understand Emotions | Huberman Lab Podcast
Published: 2023-10-16 12:00:20 UTC
Description:
In this episode, my guest is Dr. Lisa Feldman Barrett, Ph.D., a Distinguished Professor of Psychology at Northeastern University who is a world expert in the science of emotions. She explains what emotions are and how the brain represents and integrates signals from our body and the environment around us to create our unique emotional states. We discuss the relationship between emotions and language, how our specificity of language impacts our emotional processing, the role of facial expressions in emotions, and how emotions relate to sleep, movement, nutrition and the building and reinforcement of social bonds. We also discuss actionable tools for how to regulate feelings of uncertainty and tools to better understand the emotional states of others. This episode ought to be of interest to anyone curious about the neuroscience and psychology underlying emotions and for those who seek to better understand themselves and relate to others and the world in richer, more adaptive ways.

#HubermanLab #Science #Emotions

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman
Levels: https://levels.link/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman 
Momentous: https://livemomentous.com/huberman

Huberman Lab Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. Lisa Feldman Barrett
Website: https://lisafeldmanbarrett.com 
Academic Profile: https://cos.northeastern.edu/people/lisa-barrett 
"How Emotions are Made: The Secret Life of the Brain": https://lisafeldmanbarrett.com/books/how-emotions-are-made
"Seven and a Half Lessons About the Brain": https://lisafeldmanbarrett.com/books/seven-and-a-half-lessons-about-the-brain 
TED Talk: https://lisafeldmanbarrett.com/2018/01/13/ted-talk-you-arent-at-the-mercy-of-your-emotions-your-brain-creates-them 
X: https://twitter.com/lfeldmanbarrett 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@professor.lisa 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/lisa-feldman-barrett

Articles
Emotional Expressions Reconsidered: Challenges to Inferring Emotion From Human Facial Movements: https://bit.ly/46R3XNq

Books
"Not by Genes Alone: How Culture Transformed Human Evolution": https://amzn.to/3QirDEZ
"The Body Keeps the Score: Brain, Mind, and Body in the Healing of Trauma": https://amzn.to/3rUQyVO
"An Immense World: How Animal Senses Reveal the Hidden Realms Around Us": https://bit.ly/3QhMFU9
"I Contain Multitudes: The Microbes Within Us and a Grander View of Life": https://amzn.to/3M2CY9B

Other Resources
Dr. Karl Deisseroth: Understanding & Healing the Mind: https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/karl-deisseroth-understanding-and-healing-the-mind
Counterintuitive Ideas About How the Brain Work (Lex Fridman Podcast): https://lexfridman.com/lisa-feldman-barrett
Love, Evolution, and the Human Brain (Lex Fridman Podcast):: https://lexfridman.com/lisa-feldman-barrett-2

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Lisa Feldman Barrett
00:03:01 Sponsors: Eight Sleep & Levels 
00:05:46 Core Components of Emotions
00:10:42 Facial Movement & Interpretation, Emotion
00:19:33 Facial Expressions & Emotion, Individualization
00:31:03 Emotion Categories, Culture & Child Development
00:36:53 Sponsor: AG1
00:37:50 Legal System, ‘Universal’ Emotions & Caution
00:41:07 Language Descriptions, Differences & Emotion
00:48:18 Questions & Assumptions; Language, Emotions & Nervous System
00:53:40 Brain, Uncertainty & Categories
01:02:51 Sponsor: InsideTracker
01:03:57 Brain & Summaries; Emotions as “Multimodal Summaries” 
01:14:45 Emotional Granularity, Library Analogy 
01:19:40 Brain & Compression, Planning 
01:29:04 Labels & Generalization
01:34:29 Movement, Sensation, Prediction & Learning
01:42:44 Feelings of Discomfort & Action
01:50:32 Tool: Feelings of Uncertainty, Emotion, “Affect”
02:01:18 Tool: Experience Dimensions & Attention; Individualization
02:08:36 Affect, Allostasis & Body Budget Analogy
02:15:41 Depression, “Emotional Flu”
02:20:20 Tool: Positively Shift Affect; Alcohol & Drugs; SSRIs
02:27:40 Relationships: Savings or Taxes, Kindness
02:36:50 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, YouTube Feedback, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine my guest today is Dr Lisa Feldman Barrett Dr Lisa Feldman Barrett is a distinguished professor of psychology at nor Eastern University she also holds appointments at Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital where she is the chief scientific officer of the center of law brain and behavior Dr Barett is considered one of the top World experts in the study of emotions and her laboratory has studied emotions using approaches both from the fields of Psychology and Neuroscience indeed today you will learn about the neural circuits and the psychological underpinnings of what we call emotions you will learn what emotions truly are and how to interpret different emotional states you also learn how emotions relate to things like motivation Consciousness and affect affect is a term that refers to a more General State of brain and body that increases or decreases the probability that you will experience certain emotions during today's discussion Dr Feldman Barrett also teaches us how to regulate our emotions effectively as well as how to better interpret the emotional states of others you'll also learn about the powerful relationship that exists between our emotional states and the movement of our body in fact much of today's discussion is both practical and will be highly informative in terms of the mechanisms underlying emotions and it is likely to also be surprising to you in a number of ways it certainly was surprising to me I've been a close follower of Dr Feldman Barrett's work over many years now and have always found it to be tremendously informative and when I say her work I mean both her academic published papers as well as her public lectures that she's given and her two fabulous books on emotions in the brain the first one entitled how emotions are made and the second book which includes information about emotions but extends beyond that entitled seven and a half lessons about the brain as you'll see from today's discussion Dr Feldman Barrett is not only extremely informed about the neuroscience and psychology of emotion she's also fabulously good at teaching us that information in clear terms and in actionable ways you'll also notice several times she pushes back on my questions in some cases even telling me that my questions are ill posed and I have to tell you that I was absolutely delighted that she did that because you'll see that every time she did that it was with the clear purpose purpose of putting more specificity on the question and thereby more specificity and Clarity on the answer which of course she delivers by the end of today's discussion you will have both a broad and a deep understanding of what emotions are and their origins in our brain and body you will also have many practical tools with which to better understand and navigate emotional states and moreover you'll have many practical Tools in order to increase your levels of motivation and better understand your various States of Consciousness before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is eight sleep eight sleep makes Smart mattress covers with cooling Heating and sleep tracking capacity I've spoken many times before on this podcast about the fact that sleep is the foundation of mental health physical health and performance one of the key things to getting a great night's sleep is to control the temperature of your sleeping environment and that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep your body temperature has to drop by 1 to 3° and in order to wake up in the morning feeling refreshed your body temperature actually has to increase by 1 to 3° with eight sleep it's very easy to control the temperature of your sleeping environment it's a mattress cover that allows you to control the temperature of your sleeping environment at the beginning middle and end of your night and in doing so allow you to fall and stay deeply asleep throughout the night and wake up feeling extremely refreshed I started sleeping on an eight- sleep mattress cover well over 2 years ago and it has greatly improve the quality of my sleep if you'd like to try eights sleep you can go to 8sleep.com huberman to save up to $150 off their pod 3 cover eight sleep currently ships in the USA Canada UK select countries in the EU and Australia again that's eights sleep.com huberman today's episode is also brought To Us by levels levels is a program that lets you see how how different foods and behaviors affect your health by giving you real-time feedback using a continuous glucose monitor one of the most important factors impacting your immediate and long-term health is the way that your body manages its blood glucose or sometimes referred to as blood sugar levels to maintain energy and focus throughout the day you want to keep your blood glucose steady without big spikes or dips using levels you can monitor how different types of foods and different food combinations as well as food timing and things like exercise combined to impact your blood glucose levels I started using levels a little over a year ago and it gave me a lot of insight into how specific Foods were spiking my blood sugar and then leaving me feeling tired for several hours afterwards as well as how the spacing of exercise and my meals was impacting my overall energy and in doing so it really allowed me to optimize how I eat what I eat when I exercise and so on such that my blood glucose levels and energy levels are stable throughout the day if you're interested in learning more about levels and trying a continuous gluc post monitor yourself go to levels. l/ huberman right now levels is offering an additional two free months of membership again that's levels. linkli nkh huberman to get two free months of membership and now for my discussion with Dr Lisa Feldman Barret Dr Lisa Feldman Barrett welcome wow it's my pleasure to be here I've wanted to talk to you for a very long time I'd like to talk about emotions I think everyone one has a sense somehow of what an emotion is feeling happy feeling sad feeling excited feeling uh Curious perhaps is even an emotion I don't know you'll tell us what are the core components what are the sort of macronutrients of a of an emotion uh because I know there's a debate about whether or not we should be talking about emotions versus States but what is an emotion we all are familiar with what one feels like to us but from a scientific perspective how do you define an emotion well SCI this is a scientist debate about this um nobody in the last 150 years has ever been able to agree on what an emotion is um and I think from my perspective the interesting but tricky bit is that anytime you want to talk about what the basic building blocks are of emotion none of those basic building block blocks are specific to emotion so for example there are a group of scientists who will tell you well an emotion is a coordinated response where you have a change in um some physical state a change in the brain a change in the physical state um which um leads you to make a particular facial expression so you've got physiological changes in the body changes in the brain changes in the face or in motor movements okay but that describes basically every moment of your life um your face is always moving in some way if it wasn't you would look like an avatar basically so we're we're constantly engaged in in movements and those movements have to be coordinated with the physiological changes in the body because whether we're whether we're in a state that we would conventionally call emotion or not because the physiology is supporting those it's supporting the you know the gluc and the oxygen and all the things that you need to make uh movements of your body and of course all these movements are being coordinated by your brain so of course there's a coordinated set of um features that doesn't really describe how emotions are distinct from any other experience that you have but the the claim was for a really long time that there would be diagnostic patterns okay so when something triggered fear you would have an increase in heart rate and you would have um a propensity to run away or to freeze or um not just to fall asleep although that is something animals do when they are faced with a predator but that's not part of the western stereotype for fear so that wasn't what scientists were looking for and um and also that you would make a a particular facial expression which was presumed to be the universal expression of fear where you widen your eyes when you gas like um that facial set of facial movements in other cultures like in melanesian culture for example is um is a symbol of threat where you are threatening someone you are threatening the with aggression basically is a war face but in Western cultures that's the the face that Western scientists believed was the you know the the distinctive part of that distinctive pattern for fear and so the way that scientists defined emotion for a long time was these kind of um states where you'd see this diagnostic Ensemble of signals and that would mean that anytime someone showed one of those signals they may move their face in a particular way or their heart increased at a particular time you'd be able to diagnose them as being in a state of fear as opposed to a state of anger or sadness or whatever the Imp iCal evidence um just doesn't bear that out and so it was kind of a mystery the mystery is how is it that you feel angry or sad or happy or you know full of gratitude or awe how is it that you experience these moments but scientists can't find a single set of physical markers that correspond with each state distinctively right that in in a way that you could tell them apart that's a that was a really big puzzle for a really long time I have to ask you about this perhaps myth perhaps truth about facial expressions and emotions because as you were explaining the core components of emotions I had to think back to the classic textbook images of the different faces associated with fear with delight with confusion on and on we we will get to that and your opinions on that scientifically in informed opinions of course but there is a bit of a myth that the emotion system and the facial expression system run in both directions for instance people will say if you smile it's harder to feel sad or anxious I can't say that's been my experience but I very well could be wrong so we know that when people's emotional states change their facial expressions often will change right if you see someone crying on the street um versus somebody smiling really big you we can make some assumptions about what might be going on at uh internally for them but put simply is it true that changing one's facial expression can direct shifts in the brain and body perhaps that change our emotional states if you'll permit me what I would say is that your question is ill posed so first of all it presumes that there's an emotion system and that there's a facial expression system now clearly there's a system for moving facial muscles okay but a movement is not the same as an expression a movement is a movement an expression is an interpretation of the meaning of a movement not all movements of the face are expressions um and this is a you know a problem it's a problem in science um in it's often the case uh I think in my experience in the science of emotion but elsewhere too that scientists in their efforts to make their work um meaningful to people will try to interpret their findings in in ways that uh the average person would um find interesting or the way that a physician would find interesting or a teacher or what have you to be able to use this information but then they forget that they're actually making an interpretation and they start to refer to their observations with the labels of interpretation so facial movements are facial movements people move their faces and that those movements have meaning but they're not always to express an internal state in fact one might think that they're very rarely to um Express an internal state so I don't know that there's a facial expression system either so that's there's certainly like I said um there there's circuitry for moving a face but um but what those movements mean um is highly VAR able and so that would be my second point that where I would say when you see someone crying on the street you are not looking only at their face you might be aware um that you're focusing on their face that might be the part of the entire sensory Ensemble that you are focusing your attention on but your brain is taking in an entire ensemble of signals as you know it's taking in not just the you know movements of the face the tears or whatever it's taking in all of the the entire sensory array The Sounds the smells what's going on inside your own body your brain is being um bombarded with signals from from all of those sources and when it's making an meaning out of any signal it's doing it in an ensemble of signals so research shows that baby's cries aren't acoustically specific to when they're tired or hungry or right um the you can I can show you a video without context and show you someone crying and um you might make a judgment you might think make the stereotypic judgment in the west oh that person is sad and then we pan out and really you know it's a little girl whose dad just came home from Iraq or something right so brains are always interpreting faces in context they're making guesses this is something that I've talked about quite a bit that we don't read movements in people we don't read emotions in facial expressions we make inferences about the emotional meaning of facial movements and we do it in an ensemble of other signals the the context uh as you if you will and that's really what's what's happening so um do I think that um that there is feedback from the face to the brain sure I mean there's feedback from every muscle but there's this constant conversation between the brain and the body um the brain is sending motor commands the body is you know has sensory surfaces which are sending signals back to the brain so if the face is influencing the brain it's doing so in a way that's not special it it's doing it in a way that that works for all other parts of your body too and I guess what I would say this kind of a long window did answer but over time your brain has learned that certain patterns of signal over time um recur and so if you're smiling if your brain is you know telling your your facial muscles to move in a particular way that looks like smiling um it's happening in a larger Ensemble of signals and then the brain is predicting what's going to happen next because it's learned over time what happens next so probabilistically so if you think about that as cause then sure but it's not as it's not this simplistic kind of idea that an emotion is triggered um uh it causes facial muscles to move in a particular way and therefore if you just pose your face in in those in that particular Arrangement it that will somehow feed back to the emotion system and change that system because there are no there is no emotion system in your brain and the the causation just isn't that it's not that simplistically mechanistic that makes sense to me I I uh frankly never bought the idea that just smiling would make me feel happy um especially if my internal state was not one of Happiness like fighting the internal State also so um in the early 2000s I think it was there was a lot of discussion about how positioning the body in certain ways you know taking up more space would allow people to feel more powerful and they some of these studies um and uh argued that there were even hormonal shifts associated with um taking up more space that were associated with feelings of empowerment and then when shrinking of oneself was associated with elevated cortisol States and as I say all this I'm I I want to be clear that um I do not take a simplistic view of the nervous system or endocrine system and I I didn't um I don't think that you were implying that either just want to make sure that anyone listening or watching isn't thinking that uh for instance that cortisol is bad cortisol is wonderful and essential you just need it regulated properly or that um the idea that the body and emotional states are are inextricably linked makes a ton of sense to me but the idea that you could just you know grab onto one of the nodes in the now I have to be careful not say emotion system um like position of the body like being hunched over makes you depressed no that never made sense to me taking up more space makes you feel more uh powerful that doesn't it it can't be that way and yet we were told for about a decade through especially through popular press that this stuff was true um and so what I love about your work is that it includes a neuroanatomical a psychological a network work perspective that that there isn't one seat of emotions and and so on um so if we could go a little bit further into the facial expression piece for a moment sure I was taught in my Psychology and Neuroscience textbooks because it was right there in front of me that there were some core categories of facial expression that were Universal across cultures that conveyed something about the internal state of the person that the downward you know lips in the corner and and some and maybe even a furrowing of the brow was associated with negative veent States like sadness perhaps even depression that the opposite of upward turn corners of the mouth and widening of the eyes was delight and excitement some of that feels pretty true to my experience but how do you and other serious scientists of emotions view that somewhat classic literature now yeah so I'll just say that my um my journey here my scientific Journey was not one of um attempting to overturn um a Century's worth of are we alled to swear basically I mean it's just it's like it's it's stereotyp it's basically Western stereotypes enshrined as scientific uh fact and that sounds like a pretty harsh thing to say but I think I pretty much stand by that at this point um but for me when I was a graduate student When I Was An undergraduate in uh in Psychology and in physiology and in anthropology you know I also had read that Darwin said that there were these distinctive facial expressions that um were coordinated with specific emotional states specific states of the nervous system this was Darwin's View and I assumed it was correct um until I started to try to use that information um in the lab and everything fell apart you know so when you show someone in uh a laboratory like a student or um somebody from the community a face a disembodied face where their the person's eyes are widened in the face and they're gasping like a stereotypic fear expression most of the time they don't know what it is and so I would try to use these faces and um as stimuli and experiments and they W they weren't working the way that they were supposed to work and there were really going all the way back to the beginning of psychology there were always debates about whether or not this was actually accurate and there's a really interesting story about how Darwin came to this idea um which I can tell you about but it it's not because he cared about emotion and he was basically taking his own very Western views about emotion to make some claims about Evolution actually so um I have more to say about that and about why it's a problem to take anything that anybody said even Darwin from you know 150 or so years ago or whatever it is and treat it like it's a modern text you know he was writing at a particular time for a particular purpose um and that doesn't necessarily mean that whatever he wrote is true um but I'll just tell you what the evidence says um that there has been in Psychology a debate really vicious debate actually for probably 50 years about the nature of facial expressions and whether they are Universal and whether there's this onetoone correspondence between a particular face and like a facial configuration in a particular emotional state smiling in happiness scowling in Anger wrinkling your nose and discussed and so in 2016 I think the association for psychological science um tasked me and some other senior scientists uh with a attempting to write a white paper a consensus paper on what the literature actually shows so what does the research actually show if you read all the research you know can you find a pattern there does it actually reveal anything about whether or not facial expressions are Universal particularly for emotion um and the way they do this they have a journal for this purpose for taking a widely held belief that is highly debated and bringing together a panel of experts who disagree with each other at the outset and they have to work together to see if they can come to consensus over the data and this is something that you know people have tried in the past and it I mean they're really vicious people have been vicious with each other over this question so when we brought together a a group of people so several people refused to serve senior scientists refused to serve on this panel but out of fear of losing their funding or something um you know that's a whole other conversation about why SC certain scientists would not want to engage W uh with um people who disagree with them um that's an interesting conversation to have but um I don't think it's as simple actually as just they their careerist or they they care about you know their money or or funding or whatever that would be an easy answer but I don't actually think that's what's going on but that's another sort of but anyway so uh there were five of us who got together um all SE senior scientists all from different fields some of us hadn't met each other before we all knew of each other of course and we met over Zoom for two and a half years this is preco because people were all over the world right and we we read over a thousand papers so so I was the only one in this group of the five of us who my starting hypothesis was that facial movements are meaningful but they're not there's no one-o-one correspondence between a particular facial configuration like a scowl and anger not not just that it would vary across cultures but that it varies for you across situations I mean do you scowl every time you're angry I don't scowl every time I'm angry in fact and I also scowl at times when I'm not angry so and there are scientific reasons to think that that the that a the collection of facial expressions that people make when they're angry or when they're sad or whatever would be highly variable so that was my starting position and then the there were varying the four guys so there was I just refer them as the guys because it was me and four guys and the guys they all to some extent thought that facial expressions were Universal but they had differing reasons and all for for for hypothesizing that and they also had different commitments degrees of commitment to that position but we right off the bat sort of agreed that we it didn't matter who was right that was just not relevant the only thing that mattered was that we could come to the consensus over the data and if we couldn't we had to really pinpoint why like so what would be the critical experiments that would have to be done in order for us to come to consensus over the data and we also agreed that um we had all kinds of contingency set up so you know you've got five senior people who are all running big labs and they're investing you know upwards of three years working on a paper so if we can't come to consensus what are we going to do are we going to write one paper and sort of write about the process or are we going to write separate papers or you know but we we had all these contingencies laid out but the key here I think is that we agreed that we were not going to be adversarial about it cuz didn't matter who was right and in fact if somebody had to admit they were wrong and someone was going to have to admit they were wrong I mean it turns out all of us were wrong about something but it we were going to be like supportive of each other and and really encourage each other um because you know being wrong is no one likes to be wrong but for scientists to admit they're wrong is hard and it's something that we should encourage each other to do I think more and and more publicly and I think the people who do that are really Really Brave and so that was my position and they all agreed and the long story short here is that two and a half years a thousand papers later we all very reasonably came to consensus that there was no evidence for facial expressions of emotion being Universal and that instead what is what there's clear evidence of is um that facial expressions the way that people move their faces in in in moments of expression is highly variable meaning sometimes in Anger you scowl meta analyses so statistical summaries of many many many studies even in the west show that people scowl about 35% of the time when they're angry which is more than chance so it gets you a good publication in you know the proceedings of the National Academy but that means 65% of the time people are moving their faces in other meaningful ways that's not scowling so if you actually used a scowl um or even you know a scowl in blood pressure or you know just maybe not one signal but like a couple signals but you would be wrong more than half the time you would miss more than half the cases and even more importantly I think that that's the reliability question so there's low reliability for um the correspondent between a scowl and anger it's above chance so scowling is one expression of anger but it's certainly not the dominant one and there is no dominant one it's just highly variable depending on the situation that you're in so sometimes when I'm angry I sit quietly and plot the demise of my enemy you know sometimes I smile in Anger Sometimes I Cry in Anger it really depends on the situation um but more importantly half of the scowls that people make are not related to anger that means that the specificity is again higher than chance but not that much higher than chance so if you see someone scowling the chances are that they might not be angry they might be concentrating really hard or they might have gas I mean there are a lot of reasons why people make a scowl um and we found this for every emotion category that had ever been studied and I want you to notice what I just did there I'm not I'm no longer referring to an emotion as if it's an entity or a thing so anger isn't one thing it's a category of things a grouping of things and if I'm not mistaken it includes verbs right that like anger as a set of verb actions in the in the brain and body yes it's a process it's not an event process exactly it's not a noun it's a verb and it's a and it's a process but the point is that um it's it's a highly variable grouping of instances if you're if you are talking about all instances of anger all instances of anger that you have ever experienced or witnessed um is a highly variable grouping of instances That Vary that they that doesn't mean they're random but what the body does in Anger depends on what the physical movements will be in anger and that depends on the situation that you're in and what your goal is and um and there are ways to talk about that in Neuroscience terms which are a little more precise but the important thing to understand here I think is that we're only talking about Western cultures now the minute that you go outside of the West to or even to the east I mean so you know there are other cultures you know that have been studied um like uh China and cultures in China in Japan in Korea they they all have access to knowledge about Western cultural practices and Norms so what happens when you go to you know to remote cultures which um have much less access so they it's not like they have no access because we we live in a globalized world so even hunter gatherers in Tanzania the hza have access to Western practices and Norms but much less much less and we did do that and um and all bets are off there I mean most of the time they don't even they don't even understand or experience facial movements as having anything to do with emotion so if they saw an emoji of a smiley face would they just assume it was a couple they might think it's a face there because as we both know there's some fairly hardwired brain circuitry for the the two eyes and a and a line beneath it and something in the middle that pseudo NOS that organization of of just spatial features cues up face for both for most privates it's really interesting that you say that because yes of course that's true but it's not there at Birth what's there at Birth is a preference for that configuration right so it's it's like there's some and we could talk about why that's there it's actually very controversial but um but what babies what newborns Orient to they Orient to that or they Orient to that configuration but it doesn't have to be a face and then very quickly they start learning faces because they're exposed to fa I mean really the first three months of life is almost like a massive continuous tutorial on what faces are because they're you know being fed and and everyone's in your face saw a baby last night and you see the baby friends of have a unbelievably cute baby with the big cheeks and you want and there's this desire to see the baby smile right so you do the things that and if that the baby shows some sort of facial expression that makes it seem like it's a little bit um like resisting what you're you you stop doing it you change up your strategy and then when baby cracks a smile like now I'm going to assume that the baby may or may not have been happy inside um that little baby head um but when they do there's a reciprocity then we smile exact there's a template that that's very robust right but I want you to notice though that so first of all I'm not saying that um that recognizing faces a face as a face is not hardwired it is but it's hardwired by not by genes alone right and in fact there's a really wonderful book called not by genes alone basically there's cultural inheritance we have the kind of nature that requires nurture we have the kind of genes that require Early Learning we have we need wiring instructions from the world to get the rest of the information that we need to be competent culturally competent in our in our in our lives and that starts at Birth it probably starts before birth even um but um in the third trimester there's some evidence of learning fetal learning even in the third trimester so um the point is not that people aren't hardwired for viewing faces or recognizing faces is just where does that hard wiring come from it's not by genes alone genes aren't the blueprint the brain is expecting certain inputs from the world and it needs that because infant brains are wiring themselves to their world and part of that world is people making faces at them and smiling and those people happen to also be the ones who are maintain who are maintaining that baby's nervous system I mean there is reward learning right or reinforcement learning right off the bat because these are the people who keep you comfortable they are the ones who feed you they're the ones who help you get to sleep and so on and so forth and so you're going to be very very sensitive to changes in the contingencies of their behavior your brain as a pattern learner is just going to learn those patterns if we know that smiling is more you know smiling is a cue for happiness it's because we've learned it and that doesn't mean that that learning isn't hardwired it just means that it that information got into your brain by cultural inheritance which is a part of evolutionary theory in the extended evolutionary synthesis not in the original you know not in the original uh formulation that some people still kind of stick to as many of you know I've been taking ag1 daily since 2012 I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast ag1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that's designed to meet all of your foundational nutrition needs now of course I try to get enough servings of vitamins and minerals through whole food sources that include vegetables and fruits every day but often times I simply can't get enough servings but with ag1 I'm sure to get enough vitamins and minerals and the probiotics that I need and it also contains adaptogens to help buffer stress simply put I always feel better when I take ag1 I have more focus and energy and I sleep better and and it also happens to taste great for all these reasons whenever I'm asked if you could take Just One supplement what would it be I answer ag1 if you'd like to try ag1 go to drink a1.com huberman to claim a special offer they'll give you five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 again that's drink a1.com huberman so it's far more nuanced uh than it was presented to me in those textbooks and and it sounds like it was outright wrong on many dimensions well can I just mention one thing though please this is really serious stuff like sometimes people think well you know what's the big deal this is such a big deal I'll tell you why it's a big deal because in our culture people believe that they can read mental states of other people by their face and they believe it so much that it's enshrined in the legal system and there are people who lose their lives because juries believe that they can read remorse or or the lack of it and in fact there was just a case um you know last year I believe where um you know the Innocence Project uh got involved because there was a woman who was on death row and what put her on death row was um a police officer's claim that he could read her emotions by her the comportment of her face and her body and um and you know uh it was possible to get a stay of execution so that she could be retried and you know um so I'm not saying she was guilty or not guilty I'm just saying what put her on death row was evidence that would not be admissible in a scientific um way now um and there are there are lots of cases where judgments are made that end up impacting people's lives in pretty serious ways so this is a really serious thing and it's um it's puzzling to me why it's so it's got such traction this idea that there are these Universal um Expressions that we can use to read each other you know um it's it's just not true I mean the science just it's so overwhelmingly I feel like you know scientists I don't like to use the t word you know the fword fact you know it's a scary word t word truth but I think in this case I feel like I can I can really at least with a little te I can I can use it you probably have particular facial movements that you make on a regular basis that are tells for you I know I do you know my husband can look at my actions and he can make really decent guesses about what's going on for me upstairs right but that's because he's known me for 30 years actually 30 years today I should just met each other 30 years ago today but he's you know brains are pattern Learners so I'm not saying that everything is random and like there's no it's all noise I'm saying that there just aren't these you know Universal templates they just it's not like that and we really have to stop assuming that that that there are well I'm so glad that you're getting that message out there and I'm very thankful that you highlighted the seriousness of this um these myths that have propagated and that's a perfect segue into what I was already going to ask which is um it's based on something that I think is in very much agreement with what you're saying a previous guest on this podcast I think it was our first guest episode Dr Carl di Roth colleague of mine at Stanford incredible bioengineer um really you know point 1% in his you know category of science as well as a practicing uh psychiatrist said something which really stuck with me over the years which I once heard him say you know we don't really know how other people feel at all in fact most of the time we don't even know how we feel and that prompted the question for me about how good or poor are we at gauging our own emotional states and in particular at labeling them both to others and for ourselves and and so here's the the direct question is language sufficient to capture this incredibly complex thing that we're calling emotions so for instance the other day I was in New York with my sister then she left I went out for a bit I was having a pretty good day and then I returned to the place where I was staying and I was hit with this feeling of intense loneliness and I don't know why and then I had a bunch of ideas about how that related to Growing Up and and but I was going to see friends the next day and I'm an adult and so I could use some top down regulation and say oh you know maybe I'm a little tired or I didn't cuz I hadn't slept as well the night before I've been pretty rested recently and then I actually wrote in my journal I I said you know maybe most of feeling good is being pretty well rested and not in any physical pain that's a big part of feeling good is the absence of fatigue and the absence of physical pain and and then I thought wow that's just so basic there like two building blocks it's clearly insufficient but then I couldn't think of a word to adequately describe the emotion that came about an hour later when I was feeling a little bit better but not completely better so was I lonely not really not anymore was I sad not really but you know as I head headed out into the city I was thinking I don't really have a word for how I feel I'm sort of okay not great not low you know and so I think that we have emotional labels I certainly do for Peak you know these Peak emotional states super happy I loved the time with my sister we do this every year this was a particularly good year for us um to do this and and it went really well we were texting back and forth how great it was I certainly know what it feels like to be really down in the in the pits I've got language for that but then there's this huge range in between and so I guess the simple question is should we even trust language as a way to understand how we're feeling or are there additional if not better signals that we should perhaps learn to elaborate um our understanding of emotions with so I'm going to give you a a simple answer and then I'm going to give you a more complicated answer right so the simple answer is no language is not sufficient period I think the way that you have well I should say one language is not sufficient so English is not sufficient and probably French on its own is not sufficient and probably Swahili on its own is not sufficient although it's very interesting that the the states that we Mark with words in each culture some of them overlap but a lot of them don't and it's very very useful to have labels of emotion Concepts from other cultures that that capture configurations or a state that we we don't really Mark we don't Mark those and and sort of distinctively pull them out as as different from other States I'd love to know what some of those are oh there there um I should have brought them with me I mean there there are some like there's one there's a German word which I can't remember the name of the word but it's like um the experience of someone having a face that deserves a punch I'm sure someone will tell us in the comments someone someone who knows German or spend time there please put that word in in the comments but don't don't punch any another one that's my favorite is um um liut which is um it's a Polynesian um head hunting um uh emotion word and it means um exuberant aggression in a group like soccer or or head hunting right where you're basically um or I should say also um in the military so when I was listening to m one day A couple of years ago must have been more than that because it's in my book so it was probably more than seven years ago I was listening to these guys talk these former um um military uh Personnel talk about being um deployed in a war where they're with their buddies and they're they're basically hunting the enemy and they feel exuberant like they're you know and and they're it's not that they're happy but they're it's Pleasant and it's very intense very high arousal you know and in the moment it it seemed right and then they come back um you know and they ask themselves like they come back and so they're now you know their deployments ended now they're back home and they're like am I a psychopath like I enjoy killing people what is this about and I was thinking no no you just experienced ligot and if you had a word for it you would understand that it's a groupy feeling where you're all in it together and it's really intense and you know they were experiencing the um the intensity of of um having their life on the line and and being responsible for their for their brothers you know and sisters in in in their troop you know so um the the what they would realize is it's a perfectly it's perfectly within the range of normal human variation it's just that in English we don't have a word for it really but there are words there are Concepts in other languages right or the other one that I like is called gigle which is where when you see a baby who's really cute and you just want to like oh you yesterday evening squeeze oh my God that kid was so cute there little cheeks are just like jumping at you and and the parents are delightful people too and they was just facing out cuz they had one of those outward facing baby things and it's just sort of like yeah it's and I thinkle it's called it's gigle gigle oh keigle is from the other episode that we did on well it also has to do with babies but yeah in a different way um or there's one in I think there's a Japanese word for the despair that you feel when you got a bad haircut really yeah because it's I mean it's really is a different kind of feeling than you know because you've got to like wait for it to grow you know whatever anyways the point being that amazing words for us Mark particular States and they're not all the they're not always the states that other people in other cultures care about but I there's a but the even again the phrasing of your question I just want to come back to and I'm not trying to pick at you but feel free what I love is that what what you said before when you said my question was Ill posed in your in the answer that followed it made it very clear why and I learned something about how the the the the not emotion system but the things plural that that create emotions work so uh feel free I I I grew up in the same culture that you did I'm not Canadian by birth but but in the academic culture yeah you know I mean that the stuff that we take online by the way folks is nothing compared to the kind of hazing that I experienced growing up in uh in academic culture as it was done then I don't know if it's still that way now so uh feel free yeah I think I'm tougher than I look well no I think my point is that I'm trying to get at here is that when we ask questions any of us me too anybody ask a question there are certain assumptions that we're making in order to allow us to pose the question and sometimes what I'm taking issue with is not the question itself but it's the assumptions behind the question right and this is a very classic thing in philosophy of science which I know I just said the p word philosophy which scientists you know usually they roll their eyes back in their head and fall over when you talk about that but I think it's really important so you know can language is language sufficient to label or to to to gauge emotional states kind of sounds like and this is the assumption that people make that there's a state in here called an emotion and now I have to label it I have to identify it that is not how it works like that is not what your brain is doing at all and in order to explain what I think is happening and what I my best available guess you know like based on what I understand it's like not even remotely that that is just not a meaningful question at all um I do think words are important I just don't think that they have to be ins sufficient by virtue of what the brain is actually doing and the way that I come at this is just really different from a lot of my colleagues so really for a hundred years at least I hate when people say things like that like for a hundred years but it really is like for for a hundred years at least what psychologists and neuroscientists do have did and are still doing is they start with a folk experience a folk category a common sense experience I feel angry uh I'm making a decision um having a memory I'm remembering something they start with their experience and then they go looking for the physical base of that experience in the brain or in you know in the body I think that's really problematic because not everybody in the world actually uses those categories or has those experiences a lot of that has to do with the scientific publication process for sure one of the most important statements I ever heard he's from the late Ted Jones one of the greatest neur anatomists of probably the last 500 years um which was the following he said a drug is a substance that when injected into an animal or a person produces a scientific paper and many Wonder yeah yeah you kind of catch catch you square in the face can you go oh right yeah I mean basically every drug disrupts if taken an hour or two before sleep changes the amount of REM sleep that you get so so I could imagine that almost any perturbation of the language system the body the facial movement system could give you a quote unquote effect that you could write a paper about but that doesn't mean it has any semblance whatsoever to what's happening in the world when we or other people experience emotions and here's the here you know there's so much in what you said that I I just want to it's very it's very exciting to talk to you so the first thing I'll say is that um you know we often will identify we we as in the you know people but also scientists identify biological um um signals um by what we believe them to mean psychologically so serotonin is is a happiness chemical no serotonin evolved as a metabolic regulator it is a metabolic regulator and whatever it's doing it's allowing an animal to spend resources when the animal the animal's brain isn't sure there's a a reward at the end of that right so you were saying before you know the absence of fatigue the absence of discomfort that's a that's a pleasant feeling right well yeah so maybe serotonin has something to do with pleasantness because it has something to do with energetics right cortisol cortisol is on a stress hormone it's not a stress hormone I mean it's a hormone that is secreted more when the brain believes that there is a big metabolic outlay that's required that's what stress is basically the brain believes there's a big metabolic outlay that's about to be required and it matters these kind of like little semantic tweaks like they matter a lot because of how we do because of how we do research so I would say I don't start with the categories that derive from English and my own experience um I start with the nervous system I try to learn what is the best available evidence for how that nervous nervous system evolved how it developed how it structured right Anatomy to me is very important some of my best hypotheses come from just learning the anatomy and realizing oh well there's a connection there that's direct that mean that should mean something you know I mean um I could give you lots of examples of um uh where we've had we've made discoveries solely because we noticed an an a set of anatomical connections and we're really curious about what they might be involved with but if you start with that premise then you think about the brain and I think about the brain a really different way right so I don't think about the brain as a stimulus driven organ um I think about it more like this that the the brain is um first of all the brain is not running a model or or making inferences about the world all the brain knows is are signals from the sensory surfaces of its body so your brain is modeling your retina and it's modeling your ca and it's modeling the sensory surfaces of the skin and sure signals you know are you know hit those surfaces and those surfaces transduce those signals and send them up to the brain but the brain only knows the body and anything it knows about the world it knows about the world through the body through the sensory surfaces of the body so that's the first for me really big important point the second important point is that I think about the brain as being trapped in a dark silent box called your skull you know and it's so weird saying these things to you you're so much you know you're like you're this really esteemed like neuroscientist and here I am explaining to you how I think the brain works it's just very you know well it's important for our audience but it's also important for me though yes I I know I know these facts but it's I believe it's always U informative to go back to the fundamentals because we forget you know actually I would say that the uh someone once described um the I'll call him the great because he's a great visual neuroscientist uh visual neuroscientist Tony mavin who founded the department of of neuroscience at NYU once said you know a real intellectual is somebody that can appreciate and work with a topic at multiple levels of granularity for sure right it's not about and often times the the more expertise is associated with more focus on detail so I love returning to the core Basics so I I think it's wonderful please please continue so I think about the brains being trapped in this box and um it's receiving signals continuously from the sensory surfaces of the body but those signals are the outcomes of some set of changes and the brain doesn't know what the changes are it doesn't know the causes of those signals it just knows the outcomes it knows the signals that's what it's receiving and so it has to to guess at what the causes of those signals are in order to stay alive um and so that's in philosophy called an inverse problem so the brain just has a massive continuous inverse problem that it has to deal with all the time like it can't have it doesn't have access to all the information it's just a guessing machine it's a guessing machine so for example um you know if you hear a loud bang what is that loud bang could be a car door slamming it could be thunder it could be a car backfiring it could be a gunshot the brain doesn't know it has to guess and it's not making a guess like a intellectual guess the Guess is a motor plan it's a plan for changing the internal state of the body in order to support motor skeletal motor movements do I need to run do I need to shut the window do I need to get an umbrella do I you know do I need to hold my breath because the car is backfired you know what do I need to do so where does that plan come from well it comes from past experience the experience that's been wired into the brain um but the I think that the evidence suggests that what the brain is doing is basically reinstating bits and pieces of past experience so remembering although we don't experience ourselves as remembering but basically it's reimplementing ensembles of signals from the past that are similar to the present in some way now a bunch of things which are similar to each other in Psychology is a category so what the brain is doing is it's creating a it's constructing a category and in fact we think about the brain as a continuous category Constructor it's constructing a category of possible Futures possible outcomes possible motor plans and how does it know which is the right one because it's not just picking one there's going to be some sample that it's re it's reimplementing but how does it know which one which is the right one because there can only be one well I feel like in the example of a loud noise what I immediately thought of as you were describing that is that my system would become aware of it I would become aware of it but then it's a question of is there another loud noise how closely are those loud noises spaced is it getting louder or less loud and then and so a bunch of categories it it's like a bookshelf with an infinite number of books but then with the second loud noise now it's just you know one uh wing of the library and then with the the next thing that happens and the context it starts narrowing and then pretty soon you get presented with the book that says you know the roof is about to cave in sure and and I think your your your your analogy there is pointing out two things one is that um really why why the what the brain is attempting to do is to reduce uncertainty because uncertainty is super expensive now sometimes we like deliberately you know cultivate uncertainty right like we do not you know we deliberately try to learn things we don't you know that we don't know we we you know put ourselves in novel situations know we seek novelty and because it's fun and interesting and whatever sure but imagine every single waking moment of your life was like that where you didn't know you couldn't narrow things down from the library to the wing to the Bookshelf to the you know the to the the particular shelf on that bookshelf to yeah you would terrifying yeah it would be that's the label I would give it it would be terrifying cuz I couldn't plan anything or do anything because all possibilities are open right it's and it's just actually metabolically unsustainable and you know there are some there are some brains that are wired in a way that they don't predict very well they don't create these categories very well and so they're they're dealing with in really unbelievable amounts of uncertainty so that's one thing I is but that part of what the goal here if you could say there's a goal is to reduce uncertainty and I'm going to get to why this has anything to do with with AEM Motion in a minute but I I just need to set up the ground rules or the assumptions uh you know of what I'm what I'm working with here so the other thing though that you pointed out which I think is really important is that the um none of this is static it's all evolving over time right the signals are evolving over time so both the signals that are constantly hitting the sensory surfaces of the body and making their way to the brain but also the intrinsic signals in the brain it's all changing over time so when we talk about context that's important how is the brain making a decision about similarity like what are the features that are similar it's it's not just at a single snapshot in time it's always happening dynamically over time right and most of the time though you don't ask your you don't wait to hear a second sound you don't you're not deliberately attempting to figure out what the sound is your brain is just sorting it out right and it's sorting It Out by narrowing down the possibilities and there are some selection mechanisms in the brain that help it guess better but also the signals coming from the world um are are also helping to select which possibility um is the right one I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor inside tracker inside tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you meet your health goals I'm a big believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term Health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test however with a lot of blood tests out there you get information back about blood lipids about hormones and so on but you don't know what to do with that information with insid tracker they have a personalized platform that makes it very easy to understand your data that is to understand with those lipids with those hormone levels etc mean and behavioral supplement nutrition and other protocols to adjust those numbers to bring them into the ranges that are ideal for your immediate and long-term Health inside tracker's ultimate plan now includes measures of both apob and of insulin which are key indicators of cardiovascular health and energy regulation if you'd like to try insid tracker you can visit insid tracker.com huberman to get 20% off any of insid tracker's plans again that's insidetracker docomond to get 20% off there's this scene that comes to mind from that movie I think it was Saving Private Ryan where like the the um the guys that are about to hit the ground on D-Day are flinching with every crack of gunfire like they're just everything's a stimulus to move and to end and then some of the more seasoned soldiers are literally having bullets whizzing by their head and people are dropping Dead all around them and they're moving for steel eyed and stable and upright and in part we look at that and and say okay they're courageous they're seasoned maybe they're desensitized in certain ways but actually it fits much better with the idea based on what you're saying it fits much better with the idea that um they have intimate knowledge both conscious and unconscious knowledge that something right next to them is a threat but not a threat worth responding right exactly but if it were headed straight for them they would quite quite understand what I would say it's is that it's um it's not uh you know I keep referring to things as signals and really I'm just I'm that's like my generic word for a quantity of energy of some sort you know but your brain my brain every brain is constantly making signal noise distinct you know like distinctions do I need to care about this do I do I not need to care about this right and we have ways of learning and we also have ways of queuing each other so um you know humans use eye gaze to cue each other about what is signal and what is noise right so if you and I are sitting or let's say we were at a coffee shop and we were in a part of town that i' had never been to before and we were sitting having coffee and you know a loud siren went by if you turned and looked I would probably turn and look because you just queued me that that was something I need to care about if you ignored it I'd probably ignore it because you just queued me that I didn't need to worry about it I didn't need to care and we're constantly doing that with each other and we also do it with little babies and with kids and that's how we teach children this is signal this is noise this you need to worry about this you can ignore and so yeah your your description is perfect so what does this have to do any of this have to do with emotion in order to answer that part of the question I I I want to say so okay you've got these signals the brain is like has these electrical signals going on we'll just ignore the hormonal signals for the moment cuz that's complic you know one is complicated so it's got all these electrical signals going on it's when it's remembering something it's just basically reinstating a pattern of signals and it's got these signals coming in um from the sensory servfaces okay so what's so what is the brain doing it's a signal processor so what is it I don't mean a computer I mean a signal processor in the engineering sense so what's it what is it doing without getting into all the Dynamics of prediction and you know whatever what the brain is doing is it's um it's assembling a set of features it's some of the features that it's assembling are very close in detail to the sensory surfaces of the body so in primary visual cortex there's a retinotopic map the details there are very very low level like a line an edge you know same thing in primary auditory cortex right it's tonotopic so they're tones but it's very very very very lowlevel details and we might there are many many many many of these little features so we would say there there's a it's a high-dimensional array lots and lots and lots and lots of features and then and let's just talk about one structure just the cerebral cortex let's not worry about just but what I'm about to say is basically true of really the rest of the brain as well if you take the cortex off the surface uh the cortical sheet off the that wavy you know cortical sheet you dig it off the rest of the brain the subcortical parts and you stretch it out like a napkin you can see there's a compression gradient there in the architecture of the neurons so at the primary sensory areas there are these tiny little paramal neurons that are representing these little these very low-level features and they feed into bigger neurons which feed into bigger neurons which feed into more bigger neurons so what's happening is you've got this very detailed array being impressed in its dimensionality until you get to the middle of the brain at the front where there are many fewer neurons but they're bigger and they have many more connections so it's a dimensionality reduction that's happening so just to make sure I understand um correctly and that the audience understands the physical world obviously is um transformed by our sensory apparate the retina the ca the the sensing neurons in our skin yeah um it's physical things mechanical pressure light Photon sound waves okay that's translated into neural code which is chemical and electrical yeah and and those sensory inputs are are fairly vast and you call high dimension high dimensionality so lots of different orientations of lines lot even you know even though it originates with just three uh cone photo pigments lots of opportunity for encoding different shades of color contrast okay and all of that and so you have lots of little neurons to repes present all the possibilities of the physical world that are occurring mhm but as that information is passed further up along have to be careful with the use of hierarchies because that's controversial nowadays not for political reasons but for accuracy reasons um as that information is passed along there's more um convergence onto a smaller number of larger neurons so these are neurons that have access to a lot of information but in coarser form right so they're low you know it's like like compressing an MP3 like how an MP3 compresses information for example so the cortex is representing features so and I represent I'm just using that in a generic way because that's also controversial about exactly how is the okay but yeah but it works but for now I'm using it just in a generic way so you go from lines and edges to a shape like a round shape to a face to a right so you're you're basically your you're um you're going what's happening is there are summaries of summaries of summaries of summies I love that I hope everyone hears that because I've been in this field of Neuroscience a long time as you move along the neuraxis from the sensory epithelium now it sounds very very Gomen clish but from the surface of the skin inward you're getting summaries yeah they send more and more summaries I think that's so important I that's a that's a like a gazillion dollar statement for understanding of the nervous system so but each of those points correspond to some mental feature like a line or an edge or a circle or a square or a face or right but but now then you when you when you're in the midline at the front what are those features well those features are things like they are they are multimodal summaries meaning they are summaries of the sights and sounds and smells and right but they and they are lower dimensional meaning they are they're coarser so there are things like threat reward pleasure I mean really abstract that's what abstract means it doesn't mean that those representations have no sensory or motor meaning it means that threat for example a summary can have many different patterns associated with it and the brain is treating them all as equivalent this this to me again feels so so important for people to understand because um as I'm hearing this and this word summaries is just ringing in my mind it's so important because one of the core components of my experience of my emotions because that's all I can really say for sure my subjective interpretation and labeling of my own emotions is that they are pretty broad bins like I described ear pretty broad bins and so that that's where I was exactly where I was going so what about the word anger where is that represented like well that's a that's some one of these multimodal abstractions in fact anger is just a couple of phones it's a couple of sounds but those sounds the sound of anger corresponds over thousands of instances that you've learned in your life to very different patterns of sensory motor features that's right because what's going on in your body during anger can vary what the way you move your face in Anger can vary depending on the situation what you see someone else doing in Anger can vary and so the word anger or any word is actually just a multimodal summary of many many many many instances which are in their sensory and motor features the sensory and motor meaning very different and and it seems to me are highly constrained by Developmental and cultural experience absolutely because just today I learned that there's a word in Japan for the feeling that one has of having gotten a haircut they don't like there's a word in Germany that pertains to the feeling of wanting to punch someone specifically because of the look on their face well really it's more like you like you they to you it feels like they're asking to be punched in the face even so you added yet more dimensionality to it so upon learning just those things just today there is additional dimensionality brought in such that if I were to ever um want to punch somebody in the face simply because of the look on their face that I wouldn't necessarily label that as anger alone it now has another dimension to it and so I I think I'm finally I think I'm finally starting to understand how the Developmental and the cultural influences plus the fact that language is a pretty crude descriptor for this neural process that you're describing absolutely absolutely but okay so but but before you use the word granularity and so I'm going to use that word to in fact I've you I've coined that phrase emotional granularity um just as an aside you know I coined that phrase almost 30 years ago and now people study it like it's a phenomenon which is cool in a sense but also I kind of want to keep reminding them like that's a word that refers to a process it's not a thing it's a process and the but the process is so when the brain is a category Constructor how fine grained are the categories how precise are the categories right like if you're using if your feature of equivalence that your brain is using is threat you're in really big trouble because there are like a gazillion different sensory motor patterns that could go with threat so your category is going to be massive so how does the brain figure out which of those massive number of options is the one to use in this in in this instance if on the other hand you don't just want to use sensory motor patterns as the features of equivalence or the features that you're using to say this instance right now is similar to these past instances if I had to search like right now what is similar to right now it would be me sitting across the table from somebody who has a beard and is um dressed in black and you know there there are a lot of details there that probably don't matter right so you you'd be searching for a specific match from the past that's not very efficient either so you need something in the middle and that that is to say you need to have C your brain has to be able to make categories that are more fine grained but not super fine grained but they have to be more fine grained than just threat yeah you want to keep the in the library analogy that I made earlier you want to keep the rest of the library accessible at some level yeah so you're not just staring at that one book but if you use the category bad this feels bad then you're brain is basically um going to be partially constructing an entire Wing full of books like a entire Wing full of options if you use the word angry um then maybe it's a bookcase it's constructing a bookcase full of options and a category that's the size of a bookcase and if you were using the word frustrated then maybe it's a shelf the brain can learn to construct categories at different scales of gen generalizability so if I'm in an instance and um my brain is making a guess is it drawing from past instances that were associated with the word anger uh were associated with the word fear maybe it's some combination it's the words are just features they're just sounds there are also all sorts of other features like what was my heart doing what what what kind of motor actions did I make what did I see next the so the point being what I'm trying to bring here is that it's not like your brain creates an emotional state and then labels it what your brain is doing is creating a category of possible futures of what's going to H what it's going to do next and that state is largely determined by the what the brain is remembering and how it's drawing from that huge population that huge library of options which books is it sampling I love this so much because it explains so much that frankly has been perplexing to me and also somewhat troubling to me like for instance I um we hear about emotional intelligence you know and and sometimes I wonder whether or not um true emotional intelligence would be what you just described the understanding of how this process works so that you can work with it and I definitely want to talk about how can work with this knowledge because I think it's incredibly powerful in its um explanatory power but also um its actionable power um the other thing is that it's clear to me just based on my experience today of hearing these words from other cultures that relate to different emotional states that the system unlike a lot of systems in the brain I like to think is fairly plastic yeah like the moment that you know that there are additional Dimensions to sadness anger Etc there's something comforting about that what's really unsettling is the idea that we have such broad bins that we are we would Define you know a near infinite number of situations as just fear that would suck that's not a good existence and yet I have to ask whether or not you think that as a species not as a culture but our entire species whether or not we are taking the exact opposite approach that we're sort of moving into the Emoji isation is that word I'll make it a word and people can assault me in the comments um the emojiz of this very rich and complex system we're starting to get into this mode of like I'm going to post an angry face and therefore like this is a bad I'm angry at you this is a bad interaction we're going to it's it's um combat potentially combative or and you know maybe um Twitter X or Instagram or other social media sites are kind of the the epitome of this where you reduce this high-dimensional space in you you keep the the sensory stimulation very high it's movie after movie after movie and color and sound and people doing crazy parkour stuff and bears eating giraffes or whatever it is probably not Bears e and giraffes but you know what I mean and you can see stuff that's sexual and violent and political and emotional and sweet and then the cats are kissing the monkey and you're like or the monkey's kissing the cat and so it's high dimensionality in terms of sensory space but then what do we call it we're like oh this is an emoji you assign an emoji You're heting Something you're giving a thumbs up or a thumbs down so I almost feel like we we're trying to uh we we're regressing to a state where we're kind of like an infant trying to figure out like what the hell is going on and we're saying you know what you get like six categories of response when in reality um we should probably be expanding the number of different responses that we can have in order to accurately match the way that our nervous system actually works yes exactly there are many different things we could talk about with respect to the summary that you just gave which I I think is completely accurate so what I would say is that if you look through even just the last I don't know 100 or so years like the 19th you know 19th 20th centuries maybe you can see that the complexity of the of people's responses expands and contracts right so for example this is something that I've written really speculatively about um but one of the things that I found really interesting um is that you know authoritarianism authoritarian thinking is the reduction of complexity to some things that are really really simple like you're getting rid of all the complexity to you know basically these very very coarse low-dimensional judgments and Things become black and white um it's the avoidance of complexity um so that there can be simple single answers to things and it happens in human culture at times and then then there's an expansion of complexity at times too so what predicts that like what is it in the human nervous system or our Collective human nervous you know like we're we're just a bunch of brains attached to bodies interacting with other brains and bodies right so like what is it that causes these um ripples of and and I have some thoughts about that that are really really really speculative um but I think the other thing that's that's really important is that we've talked about we'll go back to our our cortical sheet that we've and by the way this is just one compression gradient in the brain there are others too right um there are at least four others that I can think of um so this is just one but all compression gradients work the same way which is that now we've talked about going from the low-level details um compressing to these multimodal summaries these really like simple um features that are right but that compression is what Engineers would call lossy meaning you lose the information you lose the information so when you go from lines and edges to a face those neurons they just know the face they don't have they lose what they've thrown away the details they've thrown away those details are gone for those neurons that are representing a face they don't have access to that they don't have access to it you know so we said well the brain is making a guess it's making a guess about what these what this big very very high-dimensional you know soup of signals in the world and in the body like what do they mean right when the brain makes a guess it's starts with the compressed low dimensional signals it starts with the features like anger or like threat or it starts with these summaries and then it has to infer or guess at every synapse there's a guess that's being made about what the details are at the next level because what's happening is the guess is basically the brain going from these really General things to these very specific sensory motor patterns it happens along the cortical sheet it happens also down the Nur axis down the nerve you know from the cortex to the midbrain to the brain stem to the spinal cord you have to go from a representation of you know run to the actual physical movements of muscles spindles and you know angles of joints and things like that so what you're doing is you're going in the other direction you're adding detail you're particularizing and the brain is guessing it's guessing well if it's using anger as the general feature well which which instance of anger is it and what are the specifics that are going to happen and and what are the W and forgive me but and what are the Adaptive steps that I might take or not take because um I'm quoting a lot today so forgive me but in the words of the great sharington Nobel prize winning physiologist the final common pathway is movement move and and movement is nuanced right humans I I suppose have among the greatest variety of different speeds and types of movement I think about parkour or gymnastics think about then what like a a cheetah can do cheetah are impressive a gymnast is truly impressive in terms of the range of movements and speeds Etc in any event the ultimate choice of the nervous system has to make is whether or not to move which direction how fast or stay still move forward move back and and I just I'll just because I'm I'm hoping that you'll expand on this um it's been said before that ultimately the nervous system is trying to make decisions about yum yuck or me like like am I going to move towards something am I going to move away from it or am I just going to stay put well that's only that's only at the that's a very I would say that those are very low dimensional features those are those compressed features but that's not the only thing the brain has to decide that's just a misnomer well good I can get out of this little pickle that I just put myself in by saying that I didn't say that now I won't quote who did cuz he's a very famous neuroscientist but he tried to reduce it all he's at Caltech it um he's not somebody who studies emotion he studies the visual system but he said that you know that that there's a that the the neural circuits maybe it's because he studies mice are are essentially bended into um yum yuck and meh outputs and and i' I've always liked it on the one hand because threes work and it's simple but rarely is the way that we describe things the way it actually works so we would you know in in study humans we would say well that's affect affect that's mood or you know it's just like is it is it um should I move towards it is it Pleasant should I move away from it is it unpleasant or you know is it irrelevant basically I don't care okay think about when you're feeling horrible you just feel you feel you just feel you feel bad what do you do you don't know what to do you don't know because you don't have a plan of action and that's ultimately that is what those those compressed like summary features those very low coarse features they have to be decompressed into details otherwise you don't know what to do so ultimately what the brain is doing is it's sampling from the past based on similarity to the present to plan an action and when I say action I don't just mean skeletal motor action like moving a limb it you the first actions that are planned are the actions of coordinating the heart and the lungs and you know all of the internal actions that are required to support the motor the skeletal motor movements so your brain is making uh is categorizing and it's making a it's it's creating a category and it's there are options there those options the motor plans begin with should the heart beat faster should it beat slower does blood pressure need to go up should the you know should the blood vessels constrict or should they dilate um should the breathing be deeper or more shallow I mean those are the first plans that get made and then milliseconds later there are the skeletal motor plans and then your experience of the world derives from those Motor plant those viscero motor that is the plans for the viscera for the internal organs and the skeletal motor so I'm just going to refer to them as motor those motor plans actually give rise to your experience of the world there's not some state that exists as an emotional state which then you apply a label to the label is a just a set of features that are useful for generalizing from the past to the present and the bin size or the the you know of of what a word refers to can change it can change it's different for different people and it can change in your lifetime and you can add new Bins that is you can so for example there's a there's a concept gusin look which I probably just butchered so if you speak Turkish I'm sorry but it's like um it has features of it of like loss and um like people blocking your goals so we would say it's anger and sadness together that's gusin look when you lose something and you're pissed off about it um that's a but that's a category on its own right it's just a different way of parsing that that that really detailed soup and the more words you know the more words are just useful for pointing to a set of features that are similar to each other so what I mean by that is if I say to you Andrew I had pizza last night for dinner pizza two sounds two syllables that those two syllables s they stand in for like 50 different sensory and motor features cuz I don't have to say to you I had a food I didn't have pizza last night but let's say I did I had a food that was round and flat and had sauce and also cheese and it it had mozzarella cheese and also a little parmesan cheese and it had mushrooms on it and a little bit of uh Olive and you know and that's like really really uh detailed and complicated but instead I can just say I had pizza two features two sounds two syllables phones and with those two phones I have just communicated to you in your brain my brain had 50 features it was representing of details and now I have just communicated those to you or some number of them with two sounds very efficient now of course you might think that I was from Chicago and had deep dish pizza and I'll just resist I don't want to like offend anybody from Chicago it's not pizza that's not real pizza that's not real Pizza um right so you could then ask me uh was it but you're from Chicago is that deep dish pizza and then I would say no no I'm actually from Toronto which is just like New York and so no it was thin crust pizza which is really the only kind of pizza there is just saying but you know but my point is that words are just stand in for they're just low these like low dimensional features these these s of gross features that stand in for many many many many little detailed features and that's how we communicate with each other and and we are constrained by you know what we know and our so and what we can say and the extent of our vocabulary and I'll just say that little babies three months old they don't speak yet and they don't understand language but they can use words to learn abstract categories so with abstract just means that the the word refers to many different patterns of sensory motor features so the word is um or the category the things that make the instances similar um are a function um or a goal not like the sensory motor features so you say to a baby very explicitly like because if we're talking about three four-month old babies right babies can also do this implicitly too um but in experiments you say to a baby look sweetie this is a bling and you put the bling down and it makes a beeping noise and then you say now this looks different feels different right smells different look sweetie this is a bling it beeps now you take something else which also is different and you say look sweetie this is a bling now the baby expects this to beep by the way folks just listening Lisa just gave three examples first with a pen then a coffee mug and then her very own watch uh three very distinct objects but all of which make uh that are told uh the baby is told make uh a bling sound and they will bend those three visually distinct objects functionally distinct objects into one single bin because they make a because they are sharing a function which is to beep I think this is so so important and I um and if I may I I I want to ask whether or not we can take this incredible understanding of emotions because that's really what we're talking about well we're really talking about how the brain my my version of how the brain works and how emotions emerge out of this system basically and and absolutely um you described it far better than I could and and and and anchor that to this concept of movement the movement is the final common path with the understanding that the movement system and forgive me but that we have systems in the brain and body that allow us to move that's for sure systems plural that they run in both directions in other words how we feel what we feel our emotions has some bearing on the movements that are more or less likely for us in a given context and our movements clearly can also influence the way that we feel internally well it's well I mean so if um if we just look at how things are happening here's here's what the anatomy tells us that when the brain makes a guess that guess starts as a motor plan starts as a visceral motor plan and a skeleton motor plan so heart rate changes breathing changes blood pressure changes and potentially skeletal muscle movement right and literal copies literal copies efferent copies of those signals are sent to they propagate to the sensory areas telling the brain telling those neurons this is the last time we made this in this context when this other stuff just happened the like this temporal context right the and we made these movements here is what we saw next here is what we felt next here's what we smelled next so yeah I think of this the image that pops in my mind and we should explain to people what eference CA is um in neuroscience and neuro Anatomy uh the connection to a structure is called an afferent with an A and the connections out from a structure called the eer but the way I was saying it doesn't even matter it's just basically the point here is that in our experience in our in the way the brain your brain conjures an experience okay and and that experience is that you feel something first you see something you feel something you act that's not what's happening what's happening is your brain is preparing the action first and the feeling what and your experience comes from that action preparation so it's a copy it's like literally you have axons that are sending motor signals down the the you know brain stem to the spinal cord and literal copies of those axons like those axons have branches that collateral branches that just send axons other places the same signal that is being sent sent to your spinal cord to move stuff in your body that same signal is being sent to other neurons in the brain as predictions of the sensations that are going to happen in a second from now a moment from now probably faster than a second but you know in a couple milliseconds if you move and so yes it is the case that what you feel is linked to what you do and what you do is linked to what you feel but not in this simple mechan istic way that that neuroscientists and psychologists have been using forever you it's not like you are you are you you you're probed by a stimulus you you see something you hear something and then you process it and evaluate it and then you react to it no that's not what's happening what's actually happening under the hood is that based on how things are right now your brain makes a guess or some guesses and those guesses start as motor plans and the consequence of those motor plans are predicted Sensations and then of course sensory signals are coming from the sensory surfaces and they s and here's the really here's to me the really the most mindboggling thing about this whole explanation if your Sensory neurons in your sensory areas are already so they're firing the the the the action potentials the spiking has changed based on these prepared motor movements so these are sensory predictions and you know when I give talks and on my website I have some cool examples of of how this works you can experience it yourself you you know start to experience uh you know you hear things that aren't there you you feel vibrations in your chest that aren't there because your brain is predicting it's predicting these Sensations so let's say the sensations come the the sensory signals I should say let me so the sensory signals from the sensory surfaces of the body make it to the brain if you have if your neurons are already firing in a way to anticipate those signals those signals just confirm the firing and then they're done they don't make it any further into the brain so when you're predicting well your experience is constructed completely by your brain the signals from the sensory surfaces are there just to confirm or to change the signals so if there's things you didn't anticipate then those um errors of prediction those are the signals that are propagated and become compressed and stuff and we have a special name for that in science we call it learning you know Andy Clark is a philosopher who writes a lot about prediction predicting brain and and so on and he talks about normal uh everyday experience as being a controlled hallucination I think that's true yeah I subscribe to that um it's a fairly adaptive in most circumstances controlled hallucination but but it has its limitations and it I mean what we were talking about um if I could be a somewhat of a summary neuron you can tell me if my summary is too coarse um is that first of all that the neural systems and the Brain let's just call it the nervous system because we're talking about brain and body are incredibly Dynamic mhm there's a bunch of inputs those inputs gets are incredibly elaborate they get summarized the summary prepares the body for a certain action that's a motor commands preot commands and then some action may or may not be taken but already as soon as an action is taken or not taken the whole state of the neural system is different it's changed as a consequence of just of what just happened now of course when people hear that and when I hear that indeed I I feel like wow it's a tough system to study because these are dynamical neural systems and and we have the technology to put people in functional scanners and look at what lights up so to speak we have the capacity to ask people how they feel based on questionnaires but you can imagine that's incredibly crude so then you give them liyer scales of you know rate from 1 to 10 how happy or sad you are and so you're adding some some depth and dimensionality to it but it's incredibly crude it's nothing like real experience and if somebody's more verbal less verbal maybe they somaticize more or less I mean an example comes to mind that you know occasionally you learn from social media which often I learn from social media and someone once said I don't think in thoughts I think in feels and I thought okay great you're probably also from Northern California and I said wait Andrew stop being so judgmental what do you mean and I asked and they said I experience emotions in their mind first as a as a bodily State then the label comes much later that's not how it works for me it feels fairly more integrated brain and body for me but other people started chiming in no I think of emotion I experience emotions clearly as a verbal label it's all in their head and so you start to realize that we might all be encoding The World Slightly differently or very differently and it's changing in time so then the question becomes you know how what are the anchor points in terms of our understanding of emotions that we can work with and and and the following questions come to mind um neither you nor I are clinicians as far as I know I'm certainly not I was actually trained as a clinician oh there you go I'm wrong again but I haven't no no no but I mean I haven't I haven't practiced in like really gazillions of years okay well you're well you're more than qualified to answer the question I'm about to ask which is to me there is a great conflict of information in the psychology Psychiatry and let's just call it wellness and mental health space which is is when we are feeling lousy like not good let's put veilance on it just lousy I don't want in a state that we were're having an emotion that we don't want to have there's an entire category of information that says you need to feel your feelings you need to feel your feelings you need to acknowledge that they're there you need to go into the feeling maybe even full catharsis you need to amplify the feelings until they quote unquote leave your body after all Steve Jobs was into scream therapy and help expunges anger who knows you get these examples he's probably the worst example because it seemed like he was angry a lot from what I hear but then there's another category of thought which is no you need to use your ability to top down control inhibition of the cortex on Lower structures again I'm deliberately using crude language here to say wait you know this is an emotion emotions pass this is not real this is just a limited set of high dimension stuff that's been summarized and you know what like I don't need to feel this way I can make myself feel differently maybe I'll go for a run in fact I always feel better after I go for a run so even this question as simple as should we feel our our feelings or should we not feel our feelings and of course you would hope that this would be answered appropriately such that people don't go harm other people or themselves but but but assuming that they're not going to harm other people themselves verbally or physically then you really get yourself into a bit of a pickle like we don't understand what to do with emotions ours or other people's because clearly we don't understand emotions per se so I would say I'm going to answer your question and then I want to also pick it the word the I want to pick it an assumption um because it it's come up actually a couple of times and there's something super important in your descriptions that I just want to pull out for for the listeners because I think it's really important and you're doing it very naturally but I think some people it would be it just Bears commenting on so let me just deal with the question of should we feel our feelings or use our words you know we say to little kids use your words like don't throw a tantrum right um but then there was also this other feeling oh just feel it's important to feel and you don't want to get it have it be pent up and you know use your body and like like hit a pillow I mean there's scream therapy bite the pillow Scream the pillow tear the pillow I there's can pay $5,000 for a week of doing this and they'll tell you you're going to feel better at the end so the answer there is it's the wrong question like flexibility is important for everything always right so um first of all you don't have you don't have emotions in your body your body doesn't keep the score you know yeah great book title because it's super catchy but with all due respect to I think the important work of Vander I think think it oversimplified and led people to believe that their back pain was trauma and that all trauma is semat of size and it's not no it's not but I I would go further and say like first of all your body does keep the score your brain keeps the score your body is the scorecard that's super important and he has done really important work but his explanations for why things work is scientifically incorrect it just is because we don't feel things in our bodies we everything we feel we feel in our brains we don't see in our eyes we see in our brains of course we need our eyes but we don't see in our eyes just like if you you know pinch your your hand with you know take skin and pinch between you know two two fingers the skin you don't feel that actually in your hand you feel it in your brain that's the magic of the brain in a sense so what I would say is it um uh it depends on the situation and what your goal is um sometimes it is useful to use your words and sometimes it is useful to go for a run it just depends on what your goal is well both those cases you're you're uh that you gave both those examples excuse me you're um it's a way of Shifting off the emotion I guess what I'm asking is well sometimes you don't want want to shift off the emotion sometimes the mo sometimes the wisest thing to do is live in the emotion that is you know sometimes uh discomfort sometimes when something feels bad it doesn't mean something is wrong it just might mean that you're doing something hard well earlier I wrote when you're talking about the the broad categorization of emotions I I wrote down you know simple is good when it feels good you're like I just feel really great but then when things feel lousy that's where Nuance could be beneficial yeah absolutely because we're because emotions are recipes for Action that when you go from be feeling bad to feeling angry or sad it's a recipe for action and I would also say and this just this is an analogy but I I sort of I stand by it um you know uh when I was um I had major back surgery a couple years ago and I know something about chronic pain it's not my area of study but I know something about it because I've I've reanalyzed some some data sets and I've read a lot so I'm not an expert but you know I have ideas and I thought to myself well I just I don't want to end up with chronic back pain so what I did was I made sure after I got through the first couple of weeks where I really needed oxycodone so that I could walk you know I was up and walking the same day I had surgery if you could call it walking it sort of a euphemism for like hobbling around on a with a walker but um I made sure that I felt the pain that is I dosed myself with discomfort quite deliberately because I wanted to make sure that I'm I'm sorry for using you know cartisian language I don't know how else to say this I I wanted my brain to be taking in the prediction error I wanted my brain to to feel the to to I wanted to focus attention on the changing dis you know the the changing discomfort over time because it meant that my body was healing as the discom Fort got less but my brain would never feel that discomfort changing if I uh took painkillers and because the prediction error the things that the brain doesn't predict are teaching signals and I think it's true also in your life like sometimes you want to feel it because you you want to feel the discomfort because it's instructive about something and sometimes it's not and that's maybe that's not really an answer but the only way that you can figure that out for yourself is to do it sometimes if you're always getting rid of discomfort you never know when it's useful and it is useful sometimes but now I want to get to this point that I was making before like we are talking about feeling and emotion interchange like they're interchangeable and they're not right so here's how I would say it your brain is always regulating your body 247 and your body is always sending sensory signals back to the brain about the sensory state of the body and our nervous systems aren't wired for us to experience those sensory changes that are happening in the body in any degree of detail we're just not and it's a good thing like right now as we talk here our hearts are beating and our you know pancreas is squishing stuff out you know liver is you know filtering and like you know oxygen concentrations are changing like a there's a whole drama going on inside each of us and our listeners and we're largely not aware and I hope our listeners aren't aware because if they were they would not be listening to anything we were saying they'd be completely you know in in raptured or or in discomfort at what's going on inside them instead the brain creates a low-dimensional summary this gross kind of like barometer which is feeling affective feeling we call it or you could call it mood but scientists call it affect with an A Feeling Pleasant feeling unpleasant feeling worked up feeling calm feeling comfortable feeling uncomfortable it's kind of a general barometer of the state of the body and it's not emotion that those feelings those features of feeling are features of Consciousness because your brain is always regulating your body your body's always sending signals back to the brain the brain is always representing them in this low-dimensional way whether you're paying attention or not like whether the brain is focusing it's you know applying attention to those neurons or not the those signals are there and even when we're not emotional you know like if you're driving on the highway and somebody cuts you off and you think what an the assholeness of that person that intensity of that negative affect is you experience it as a property of that person but really it's coming from you it's it's not a property of that person it's that's a feature of your experience in that moment and affect is always there sometimes it's in the foreground sometimes it's in the background but it's always there and it's a summary of physical things which is why it helps to if you take ibuprofen or Tylenol it will redu I mean study show it reduces negative feeling if you go for a run if you go for a walk if you shift your attention to the outside world then the features that of experience that are derived from the inside World diminish that's why going for a run helps or going for a walk helps or you know getting sleep helps right these are all things where you're changing the state of your body and so the sensory state of your body is changing and so your affect changes but emotions are the story that the brain tells about what caused the sensory signals that affect derives from so what caused those changes what do I need to do about those changes that's that's like it's a it's a much bigger event than just these features of experience which are all features of Consciousness which are always there they're always there and in fact in our culture we we pathologize people when they just experience their bodies as physical Sensations and not as emotions like we say oh that person is Som somatizing or somatizing they're not they should they're really they're they should be experiencing emotion but really they're you know experiencing a stomach ache and that's bad but that's actually a judgment call that is probably sometimes wrong sometimes it's probably better to experience stomach ache sometimes it's more productive part of being emotionally intelligent is knowing when not to construct an emotion you know like right before Co the covid pandemic was announced officially I was in New Zealand giving talks and my daughter who was who was in college at that time was flying uh literally like I think less than a week before they pandemic was announced she got on a plane and she flew to New Zealand to meet me because it was spring break and I always would bring her with me on spring break and in that and I remember really vividly I was in New Zealand there was only one case one case of covid in New Zealand at that point and I I got on the phone to my husband and I said I'm experiencing a very high level of arousal and it's very very unpleasant now my husband knows me very well and he said yeah there's a lot of uncertainty and I said I know now he didn't say to me well you're anxious and you just don't really know it I because I wasn't anxious I was feeling uncertain and as you know or maybe people are know that when there's a lot of uncertainty there's also a lot of arousal because the brain is attempting to learn and the neurom modulators that are important for learning new things happen to also cause uh a subjective sense of arousal and some they actually also modulate your autonomic nervous system so your heart can beat faster and whatever and our go-to explanation for what that is is to experience that arousal as anxiety but I was uncertain and remember that how your brain the story it's telling itself the category it's making is a plan for action well what do you do in anxiety and fear you freeze or you run away what do you do in uncertainty you forage for information you tolerate the discomfort and you forage for information which is what I was doing when I called and said what should we do should I metet her at the airport and turn around and come back or should we have a vacation like I don't really know um and you know what I ended up doing was foraging for information for another couple days and then made a split second decision in the air we were flying from one Island to the other and might just re-rooted us and we went home and then the borders closed like two days later you know but my point is that it this is not just you know uh psychological mumbo jumbo you can train yourself to experience your heart pounding in your chest as determination but when my daughter this is all in how emotions are made these examples but they're true I mean my daughter this is the this book I wrote a couple years ago when my daughter was 12 years old she was testing for a black belt in karate she was 5 feet tall not even and she was testing against these like massively large adolescent boys okay who were like a foot taller than her and her Sensei who was a 10th degree black belt didn't say to her don't be afraid he said get your butterflies flying information and I was like en raptured I was like oh my God this guy is totally brilliant that is the best you know meaning to give to arousal that changes the meaning of it what you do when you create an emotion is you're giving meaning to those affective feelings and you have more control than you might think in how you do that you can do it by changing the physical state that gives rise to those feelings but you can also change it by learning more how to make more categories and how to make them more fluidly um so that you do something different and the it's not that things will necessarily feel any more unpleasant or any less or or any more pleasant it's that the feeling becomes a source of wisdom it's a cue to do something different this is a case where I absolutely believe that uh knowledge about how emotions and affect and states of the brain and body work which is what you're beautifully describing for people today is extremely useful in and of itself and I think um and I it's a frankly it's a it's a refreshing and welcome departure from a lot of the conversations that we normally have on this podcast where you know we talk a lot about protocols we talk about tools things that people can do ways they can implement the knowledge and here this is certainly one of those cases as well but um it's a beautiful one and a very um important one where the knowledge itself just the knowledge of additional words for different states uh I love the example of butter putting butterflies into formation because it it inherent to that is that you're not trying to get rid of the Butterflies quite the opposite yeah um you're deploying them in certain ways and there's an action step and a psychological step there of course that's required but that it isn't um you know view morning sunlight for an average of 10 minutes to set your circadian rhythm which is something that I say over and over again I'll go into the grave saying that they'll probably put a window over my grave so sunlight can get in at this point but which should be fine with me but in any case um knowledge is power is something that we here but it's not always true often it's knowledge is power but you need to do X Y and Z in a certain order but here what you've provided and you you're continuing to provide is knowledge that people can use that real estate within their brain I'm deliberately not giving it a name um because it's it's distributed real estate that allows them to take an unpleasant feeling and work with it um that it has more dimensionality than we probably realize um that's becoming clear to me that rarely if ever is there less dimensionality um you can always give it more dimensionality by just shifting your attention and you can practice this really so you know like there's a story that I tell about when I the brief uh moment when I tried to learn how to paint you know and so uh there's an object like a cup and you have this three-dimensional object and you want to render it on a two-dimensional canvas so you could just try to draw the cup and then what you get is a pretty shitty looking you know cup um but what what a realist painter will teach you to do is to take the cup and to break it apart into pieces of light and then what you try to paint are the pieces of light so you're transferring your first what you're doing is you're taking this very low dimensional coarse object called a cup and you're breaking it into tiny little pieces of Light which is what the visual system does which is what the visual system does so what you're doing is you're categorizing it differently in order to emphasize the features that are more high-dimensional that are in there right they're in there in in the brain but you can but what you're doing essentially is you're you're having the brain your brain is applying attention to basically um focus more on those details and then you transfer the details on to the two-dimensional canvas and what you get is a pretty decent looking three-dimensional Cup on a two-dimensional canvas amazing un unless you're me and and then it still looks shitty uh you know and so maybe I'll I'll take it up again sometime uh in the future but my point is that you can do that with your own sensory condition of your body in Emotion you can deliberately focus on what your heart is doing to the to your the best of your ability that you can sense it right or you can deliberately focus on your breathing or you could deliberately focus on what your muscles are how they how tense they feel you can you can change the dimensionality of your experience by the shifting of your attention I love it and uh forgive me for giving another example but I think it's one that will resonate with both of us and hopefully with our listeners as well which is um the great Oliver Sachs neurologist and author um talked about and wrote about you know he'd work with these patients that were either had locked in syndrome or severe autism or severe tourettes or Parkinson's and you know most people would even clinicians who specialize in those areas would look at those people and say that they're living in a diminished world it's it's they lack capacities that other people have and um and it's all about the a the absence of certain abilities and uh and then what he did eventually was incredible he loved animals so he would spend time thinking about what it would be like for instance to be a bat hanging in the corner of a room and experience the room not through vision but mainly through echolocation and he would spend a lot of time thinking about that he also did a lot of drugs at one point in his career and then stopped because they were very destructive drugs not just psychedelics but also methampetamine so yes he has that but he eventually changed his practice to trying to experience human emotion but first think about animal sensory experience and he would do that for lots of different types of animals octopuses and bats and all these different things and then it allowed him in his words it allowed him to then interact with patients in a way where he could feel maybe even empathize a little bit with how they experienced life and then he would write books about it in a way and here I'm borrowing someone else's words that storied these people into almost greater Larger than Life characters and now of course he wasn't trying to detract from their suffering but he was trying to give people an understanding of what that suffering was like through their actual experience and he did in my opinion and the opinion of many other people a masterful job in do that and and it but it came through much in the same way that your art teacher said you know pay attention to the way the the the changes in light across the the the object as opposed to trying to draw draw the object themselves that when we so the the takeaway here that I I think we're arriving at is that that you've provided is that if we take a if we add to dimensionality to our description of or experience of the sensory inputs and there's a ton of it to reach to and we maybe even come up with some new internal labels or language-based labels that we can experience the world in much richer and much more adaptive ways absolutely and I I love I love your stories and I love this story in particular about Oliver sax because um it resonates with my experience when I was reading um Ed yong's new book oh um first he wrote We contain multitudes which I think one of politzer and then um uh what is the recent one with animals an immense World an immense world and what I what I was thinking was you know it's a first of all it's a masterful masterful masterful book I I wish I had written that book I I wrote him a fan letter I was like this is such an amazing book it's an amazing book um but because he helps you experience since so what what I want to say is this that there are all these animals that have different sensory surfaces than we do and they can detect signals in the world that are that we that are not relevant to us because we don't have Sensory Services for them and it reminds you first of all that what you experience as reality is really not in the world alone and it's not in your head alone it is in the transaction between the two you know you're the neurons in your brain in in your nervous system are also part of the reality and so reality is the transaction reality are the are the features that are the transaction between signals in the world and signals in your brain and the parts of the world that some other animals experience that we will never experience they're not really part of our reality because they don't interact with any of the anything that we have but for those animals it's part of their Niche it's part of their you know Niche is just the word for the parts of the world that matter to you basically and I was thinking that if people read this book and you know maybe it will help them have empathy for other people who don't have Minds like theirs and who don't experience the world in the way that they do your description of what what um Oliver Sachs his what his um his actions were and his goals it did occur to me that this book by Ed would be a great tool for helping people to understand that the way that they experience the world it might be different than how other people experience the world and even a little bit of a window on that it would be a good thing so I'd like to ask you more about this word affect and then I'd like to discuss how things that we do or don't do might be useful for putting us in Broad categories of affect so that we might experience particular arrays of emotions um so this is my attempt to understand affect in an effort to think about some actionable items absolutely I love the word affect the way you described it or setting up a potential or a series of potentialities for different emotions to occur know I make it a point to get sunlight in my eyes in the morning to try and wake up my brain and body because indeed it does that um uh broadly speaking I make an effort to get good sleep at night because that makes everything better absolutely and when I'm not sleeping well or enough it makes everything worse this is non-clinical non-nan language but I think most people when they hear affect and they think about the examples I just gave kind of understand like yeah like when a kid is tired young kid they get cranky M when sleep deprived who get cranky indeed there are times when I'm sleep deprived and Little Things Great on me they're like a splinter just feels super annoying and maybe even painful but when I'm well rested things are going better it's not that bad so tell tell us more about affect because I think it's a really important Anchor Point for us to understand emotions in ourselves and other people neuroscientists think about the sensory systems for touch and proception which we call somata sensation as being in the service of motor move skeletal motor movements you really the our sense of touch and even Vision actually also works this way um and he and actually audition does too these senses actually serve and um the brain's ability to um control the movements of the body and the same thing is true uh for the um regulating the systems of the body so brains one of their fundamental jobs are to coordinate and um regulate the systems inside your body your heart your lungs your gut you know all the moving parts and the information the the sensory signals that that those um organs and and tissues and so on send back back to the brain um as I said before those sensory signals are important to the brain's ability to regulate the body but we don't feel them directly we usually experience them as affective feelings these very simple physical sorts of feelings and then we elaborate them in various ways they they really when they get very intense that those are the moments when the brain creates a creates a motion out of them so the brain's regulation of the body the predictive regulation of the body is the technical term is allostasis but when I'm explaining this to the public I use a metaphor and you know all metaphors are wrong but some metaphors are less wrong and useful so the metaphor that I use is um your brain is running a budget for your body and it's not budgetting money it's budgeting glucose and salt and oxygen and water and all the nutrients that you need to stay alive and well and so you can think about withdrawals from that budget like burning glucose or using up oxygen um you can think about deposits like sleeping and eating um you can think about you know savings um so when you're with a friend who you trust and you know everything you do actually is just slightly less metabolically expensive right and you can also think about taxes um like if you are stressed socially stressed within two hours of eating a meal that same meal will cost you the equivalent of 104 more calories in the inefficiency that you will metabolize it because of that stress um meaning you'll burn more energy you'll be more inefficient in metabolizing the food so it's as if you had eaten 104 more calories oh so I had exactly backwards and so over the course of a year that's 11 pounds so when we say that people are taxing on us yeah we like it's literally true their language Works their language works so the way I describe it is that you can think about affect as a quick and dirty summary of the state of your body budget if things are going reasonably well then you'll feel okay you might even feel Pleasant if you're running a deficit in your body budget then you're going to feel fatigued or or distressed and that doesn't mean something is necessarily wrong like for example when you exercise you get to a certain point where you've reached your ventilatory load usually it's like you know 20 minutes in or 10 minutes in or whatever depending on hard you're working and you start to feel unpleasant and fatigued but that doesn't mean that something's wrong that just means that you're working really hard and you have to push through it and then you know when you you know drink water and you know you eat afterwards and replenish and then you're fine right in fact you're better it's it's a a way of um building a better stronger future you so affect is basically you know when when things when you're feeling really worked up it probably means that something's uncertain somewhere so I just think about these as like quick and dirty ways of thinking about your your what your what Your affect means and um and then oftentimes as we've said before emotion regulation that is controlling emotion really actually is not so much about changing the meaning of affect it's changing the affect um and um so it's useful to understand that affect is tied to the state of your body or actually what it's tied to is your brain's beliefs about the state of your body your brain is modeling the state of the body and that's interception that's the technical word interception is not your awareness of your body it's your brain's modeling of your body what your brain believes to be true about the metabolic state of your body and that's how I think about affect that's how I think about my own AFF that's and my daughter actually who um you know was depressed for so I should say depression is like a bankrupt body budget like you just can't move you you feel fatigued so fatigued that you can't move and you're very distressed it's like bankruptcy and actually if you I mean depression is a metabolic illness and if you look at the symptoms of depression they really are about metabolic um uh having metabolic deficits basically and it's interesting that one of the Hallmark features of depression subjectively speaking is lack of positive anticipation about the future which makes perfect sense from the perspective of a depleted brain body budget yes exactly you're and you're basically think about the fact that prediction error right so if you're feeling unpleasant you're not going to be anticipating Pleasant things and even if those things that are in the world could give you pleasure you won't notice them because learning from prediction error things that you didn't predict is expensive and if you don't have the resources you're not going to right so it's but anyways my daughter came up with this um after we had this very interesting thing that happened to us on another trip um we were in Sweden because I was giving a a keynote at The kolinska Institute and we went I took her to Sweden and this is when she was recovering from depression and like you know she is just one of the millions of young adults who you know adolesence young adults who were experiencing depression and uh we got to Sweden and she was very very jet lagged we both were it was like one of these like you know we had to like you know Planes Trains and Automobiles like it was just you know getting there and she woke up the next morning and she she looked horrible she felt horrible it actually seemed to me like she was about to enter another depressive episode and I said to her I basically got her out of bed I fed her a meal I gave her four ibuprofen and I put her back to sleep and she got up five hours later and she was absolutely fine her mood was fine now I'm not telling you that Ibuprofen is the an anti-depressant that you should take if you're depressed but what I'm telling you is that you know you said something Andrew that was so interesting at the beginning you said am I fatigued does my body do I have pain somewhere is my body hurt you know these are well right when basically what was having was she was fatigued and she was having what I would call um it's called the technical word is visceral no subception which means her stomach hurt her you know everything hurt and sure you know her muscles probably hurt too but it was really her innards really she just was distressed and the um the ibuprofen helped her get back to sleep and then she slept and she got up and she was completely fine and then we walked around Stockholm for the rest of the day talking about this experience which for her was like flipping on a light switch you know how emotions are made this book that I referred to I wrote that book for her I wrote that book for her but also for me because it was a way of putting down on paper all the things that I wanted her to know that and that I thought other people should know about their kids you know and maybe even their kids could read it but what she did with that was she came up with a New Concept called the emotional flu and the emotional flu is when you're having a bad body budgeting day and you're just like you didn't get enough sleep maybe or you know there's some stress at at work or at school that you can't get rid of otherwise you know my husband likes to say well uh you know other people's opinions of you are just electrical activity in somebody's head which I love like that's just another way of categorizing it it's sort of like taking apart the taking apart the cup into pieces of light right and so whatever there are just these moments where you feel depleted and you could use that I mean the we usually we often use affect to as a as a indicator of how the world is you know if I feel bad something must be bad wrong in the world but you have to resist that sometimes because sometimes there's nothing wrong in the world it's just that you didn't get enough sleep or you know you need to have a little bit more you know protein or maybe you haven't gone for a walk and you're stiff or whatever you need to do some stretching are those sorry to interrupt but I think people are going to want to Anchor to a few of these um you positive steps that they can take to to I don't want to say replenish but to shift AFF effect in Positive Directions sleep movement nutrition yes and I've heard you say before that we are essentially amino acid forging machines so I notic you said protein you didn't say you need a bagel you said protein um we could go down that rabbit hole maybe maybe we do maybe we don't but I want to use this also just as a quick opportunity to say as you're saying all this one can immediately understand why alcohol and drugs of abuse are both so compelling right you're not feeling well so take a you're feeling tired take a stimulant that releases dopamine and epinephrine but you're taxing your already taxed body budget yes in a way that then puts you in a more depleted State later or alcohol like you feel lousy alcohol never did this for me but friends I have who are covered alcoholics will tell me that it was like a magic Elixir it made them feel right that's their language but then of course there's a price to pay later because then it drops your Baseline below where it was initially absolutely 100 110% but I just also want to say that so is serotonin like so are so is so are ssris maybe and when I say maybe what I mean by that is if you really have a metabolic problem like say something's wrong with your mitochondria or you're recovering from an illness and you know that or or there's just some metabolic problem in your body that metabolic problem is real if you start to feel unpleasant you will I mean feel unpleasant it will feel your mood will be negative if you start taking serot if you start taking ssris which will leave more serotonin in the synapses of your uh neurons before it's re it's taken up again that will juice the system you will be able to spend you'll be able to move you'll feel like you have more energy for a while but your nervous system is is a complex system and so it's going to make adjustments elsewhere to try to deal with that budgeting problem so exactly what happens when you take drugs of abuse and what happens on the short term can happen for some people with ssris on the longer term where at first it starts to work and then it stops stops working and you start to gain weight and you know and your because your metabolism is slowing because your brain is attempting to deal with that with that budgeting problem so it really matters what the you know what the source is it could be that your brain believes you have a budgeting problem but there really isn't one it could be that there really is one these things matter to how you treat it one thing uh to um just mention about ssris and I unfortunately for reasons of confidentiality I can't cite The Source on this but let me just say that somebody who's highly informed in the in the landscape of of pharmaceutical treatments for um psychiatric challenges has told me that there's an emerging Theory among psychiatrists as kind of a collective emerging theory that um one of the reasons why nowadays you hear about so-called treatment resistant depression but you did not hear about so-called treatment resistant depression prior to the Advent of ssris is that there's a growing body of thought in the psychiatric Community the ssris May over time as you're pointing out deplete the very neural systems that subserve enhanced mood so it's it's different than a drug of abuse that gives you a very acute effect like methamphetamine or cocaine or alcohol but that over time you may actually be pulling the very neural circuits and neurochemicals that would allow for positive affect deeper and deeper into the trenches um so to speak and so there's a growing number of people who simply don't respond to the drugs any longer or other treatments right so I wasn't trying to say the mechanism is the same I was basically saying the theme is the same and I'm agreeing with you yeah what happens over the short term with drugs of abuse happens over the longer term with for some people with ssris because it hasn't been recognized yet that the that at the basis depression is a metabolic problem and when you have a metabolic problem like diabetes or obes obesity or like uh or um heart disease it's not that that causes depression it's that there's a common problem which is that somewhere in this very complex system of your metabolism there's there there's a drag and it produces negative mood and that's how you experience it sometimes it's good not to turn it's productive not to turn uh that negative affect into an emotion sometimes you know sometimes a cigar is just a cigar sometimes you just need to deal with the affective Problem by dealing with the physical your physical state and that's the tricky bit is knowing when is affect telling you something is wrong with the world and when is it telling you that there's something wrong with your physical state that you need to attend to I think everything to me at least starts with a good night's sleep on a consistent basis and and every psychiatric Challenge and indeed suicide itself um is seems to be associated with and often preceded by challenges in sleeping changes in in in circadian rhythm so I think um that's why to me sleep is the foundation of mental health and physical health yep absolutely and so when I tell people when they say well what can I do I was like well if there's only if there was only one thing that you could pick I would say get get a good night's sleep on a regular basis if you could pick two more I would say eat healthfully like stop eating pseudo food don't get me wrong like I love french fries I love french fries they're like like God's most perfect food I mean really but eat healthfully like eat real food and get exercise and if you do those three things I know I sound like a mother and so feel free to roll your eyes at me but as a neuroscientists those are the actually before you start with all the you know mentalizing Jedi tricks you could just start with this and that would actually take you pretty far and and um and that will resonate very well with our audience um the basics of sleep exercise food sunlight and social connection are the ones that we just anchor those five are the ones that that we just keep returning to over and over again and I think people will say oh it's just simple uh motherly advice but I would I think that those five things even just the one thing around sleep there's some work that's required to get that done so it's not as simple the categories are simple but the work that's required to get great sleep as often as one can on a consistent basis if you're raising kids have a career live in the world um there's a lot there and so that's where I think there's there's a there's an elaboration of of things and one needs to learn to be be flexible like when you're traveling how do you do that when you know friends are visiting how do you do that when weather's off and so on the the relationship piece is something I was just gonna I was just G to say I'm so glad you mentioned that I'm so glad you mention because you've said before and and this was another one of those moments I listen to you I've listened to as many of your podcast as I possibly can but I think it was the first or the second one with Lex Friedman um where you said you know we are regulating each other's nervous systems I will never forget that and you know I imagine that you married your husband for a number of different reasons but um when people pair up with romantic partners with friends with co-workers the ideal situation is one in which we are not taxed where maybe even people people and just being around them or just knowing that they are in our lives provides a sort of deposit to yeah it's a savings it provides savings for sure and and I think that's a lot of what emotional resonance to put kind of Pop language on it is is all about who who feels good to be around who doesn't feel good to be around I would say the best thing for a human nervous system is another human and the worst thing for a human nervous system is also another human and so you really want to be around the people who make you the best the best version of yourself that you could be and that doesn't mean that you always get a savings like sometimes you're sometimes you're taking care of that person and so you're you're absorbing some of the their burden right and vice versa but I would say the research on you know social isolation and loneliness and so on shows us that you know well along with research on synchrony and there's just a whole bunch of research to to suggest that um we are the caretakers of each other's nervous systems and it doesn't matter what your opinion is like it doesn't you know it just but we just that's how we evolved as a species and so you get to decide what kind of a person are you going to be you know are you going to be uh are you going to be a savings or are you going to be a tax and in general it seems that people who decide that they're going to be a savings um tend to because people gravitate towards that and want more of that yeah and hopefully would provide that also I mean I think the reciprocity piece here feels really really strong well that's a really interesting thing about um about the synchrony work right so there's work that if you research that if you put people together who don't even know each other but if they if they like each other and they they have a sense of trust even after a couple of minutes they start to synchronize their physical signals their heart rate starts to synchronize their movements start to synchronize their heart rate probably synchronizes because their breathing starts to synchronize right and it's really interesting to see what you what you typically see is that who is pacing and who is leading like one person is the leader and then the other person is the Pacer um and I got that language from when I learned hypnosis by the way and um but it switches back and forth like who's the leader like in a in a good in a in a what would we say good like in a in an interaction that looks productive it it's switching all the time who is who is pacing and who is leading it's not that always one person is is um is in charge so to speak physiologically speaking we did a series recently on Mental Health with Paul kti who's a um psychiatrist and the word narcissism came up a few times because people have a lot of questions about that you know and he um emphasize that narcissists are not confident they they operate from a place of of a deficit of pleasure It's never enough and an intense Envy although that's not how they present and they're often usually not aware of it themselves but it's what leads s healthy people to feel as if the interactions with those people narcissists often can be very compelling in the moment but they feel very taxed afterwards and kind of confused by what happened and it sounds like it uh ties back to this lack of synchrony um on the positive side of things um it's also clear from what you just said that when people regulate each other's nervous systems in a way where people are making little deposits and providing savings for each other or maybe things are just neutral that um those nervous systems are then in a position to like pay attention to other things too and and and not just trying and work out the Dynamics oh for sure oh and that's very true at work so there's research showing that um especially in the creativity you know sector Innovation sector of the economy the best predictor of performance on the job is the extent to which people feel I mean after you account for sleep and and you know watering and sleeping and feeding right like the that um the best predictor is the amount of trust that you have in your team and in your managers because if the world is predictable it could still be things could be hard even when things are unpredictable you have people you know who have your back and so basically what you're doing is you're you're um they're making you know deposits or savings they're causing Savings in each other's body budgets so their their resources can be spent on the harder things which which is you know failing and you know call having to pick yourself back up and try again which is you know partly what you do when you're an innovator so I think that there's also research to show that in your personal life when you do random acts of kindness for people or when you're kind in general you derive also a body budgeting benefit from that um you know so for a while I had a friend who um we would meet each other lunch once a month then you know we would take turns paying I mean we could both pay for ourselves but we kind of got a double hit you know he paid for me one month and then I would pay for him one month and then you know so we get the double hit of uh you know being kind to someone else and uh you know and also they got the you know benefit of someone being kind to them and I'll just say I think kindness is a I don't know that we have so many conversations about that in our culture right now but I think kindness is very very underrated and should be you know like when I'm when my when I feel like I bake bread for my neighbor who's in his 70s him and his wife that's what I do when I you know when I'm not feeling good and you know if I I mean after I've taken care of the physical the possible uh physical causes I and then I feel great because he's always so he's always so grateful and and then I felt like I made his day better and then also he helps me in other ways like with my garden and stuff because he's just like a Master Gardener and so I feel like we have this relationship where we help each other and I know it sounds really sappy but and even though all the research backs up what I'm saying I it doesn't quite describe the feeling of when someone is just really happy be because you just gave them a little surprise and they're you know like that's that's there's just some juice in that I think on some culture out there there's a word for that and someone will tell us I'm sure there is I'm sure there is well I have to say um I've thoroughly enjoyed this conversation oh me too I me I I've been looking forward to it for a long time and you've provided us with a really broad Arc but also a deep dive into not just how emotions are made not just about affect but as you mentioned earlier you know really how the nervous system works and I I'm certain in fact that our audience is taking this in and realizing that that knowledge is incredibly powerful the the addition of nuance both to language and to sort of self-reflection States um as extremely valuable often times when one gets into a conversation that has some level of reductionism and you get into nomenclature and things like that it can really pull away from the the real life experience of something but this is exactly the opposite what you've done for us today is you've provided such a rich array of information that adds WR richness and depth to the real life experience and um and that is really invaluable so on behalf of myself and all the listeners and the people watching this I want to say thank you for today's discussion thank you for the books you've written which we've provided links to in the show note captions thanks for showing up on social media despite the um the the the challenges that exists there sometimes you always handle yourself uh so well there and we'll refer people to your uh excellent social media accounts as well and and just for all the work that you're doing and that your laboratory and you're now director of various things in related to Ai and more and we'll talk about this hopefully in future episodes but uh just a really enormous thank you thank you thank you for joining me for today's discussion about the Psychology and Neuroscience of emotions with Dr Lisa Feldman Barrett if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a five-star review please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast if you have questions or comments about the podcast or topics or guests that you'd like me to consider for the hubman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube I do read all the comments not on today's episode but on many previous episodes of The hubman Lab podcast we discuss supplements while supplements aren't necessary for everybody many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like improving sleep for hormone support and for Focus if you'd like to see the supplements discussed on the hubman Lab podcast you can go to live momentus spelled o us so Liv mous.com huberman if you're not already following me on social media I am hubbin lab on all platforms so that's Instagram Twitter now called x Facebook LinkedIn and threads and at all those places I discuss science and science related tools some of which overlap with the content of the hubman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the content covered on the huberman Lab podcast so again it's huberman lab on all social media platforms and if you haven't already subscribed to our zeroc cost neural network newsletter the neural network newsletter is a monthly newsletter that includes podcast mories as well as toolkits in the form of protocols so these are short PDFs that list out the specific things that one could do in order to for example improve sleep improve learning regulate dopamine we have toolkits and protocols that relate to Fitness from our fitness episodes and much much more to sign up simply go to hubman lab.com click on the newsletter tab at the top of the site and then enter your email and click subscribe I want to point out that we do not share your email with anybody and again the newsletter is completely zero cost thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr Lisa Feldman Barrett and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 177 ---
Video ID: cwakOgHIT0E
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cwakOgHIT0E
Title: How to Increase Your Willpower & Tenacity | Huberman Lab Podcast
Published: 2023-10-09 12:00:26 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I discuss neuroscience and psychology studies that address the basis of willpower and tenacity, how they differ from motivation and how we can all increase our levels of willpower and tenacity. I discuss whether willpower is a limited resource, the controversial “ego depletion” theory of willpower and the role that beliefs play in determining our tenacity and willpower. Then I discuss the neural basis of willpower in the brain and body and how tenacity and willpower relate to sleep, stress, focus and possibly to lifespan. Then, I provide a series of science-supported tools and protocols to increase your level of tenacity and willpower.

#HubermanLab #Science #Willpower

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Maui Nui Venison: https://mauinuivenison.com/huberman 
Helix Sleep: https://helixsleep.com/huberman 
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman 
Momentous: https://livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Articles
Ego depletion: Is the active self a limited resource?: https://bit.ly/3LTqnVY
Self-control relies on glucose as a limited energy source: Willpower is more than a metaphor: https://bit.ly/46Gs15n
Beliefs about willpower determine the impact of glucose on self-control: https://bit.ly/3Fa9Au6
The tenacious brain: How the anterior mid-cingulate contributes to achieving goals: https://bit.ly/48LnGzJ
The Will to Persevere Induced by Electrical Stimulation of the Human Cingulate Gyrus: https://bit.ly/3tift5M
Aerobic Exercise Training Increases Brain Volume in Aging Humans: https://bit.ly/45nmM9F
Stress relief as a natural resilience mechanism against depression-like behaviors: https://bit.ly/46AVhuc
The Good, the Bad, and the Irrelevant: Neural Mechanisms of Learning Real and Hypothetical Rewards and Effort: https://bit.ly/46mqWA6

Other Resources
Dr. Roy Baumeister: https://roybaumeister.com 
Dr. Carol Dweck: https://profiles.stanford.edu/carol-dweck 
Dr. Lisa Feldman Barret: https://lisafeldmanbarrett.com 
Sleep Toolkit: Tools for Optimizing Sleep & Sleep-Wake Timing (Huberman Lab episode): https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/sleep-toolkit-tools-for-optimizing-sleep-and-sleep-wake-timing 
Toolkit for Sleep (Huberman Lab Neural Network newsletter): https://www.hubermanlab.com/newsletter/toolkit-for-sleep 
Dr. Matthew Walker: The Science & Practice of Perfecting Your Sleep (Huberman Lab episode): https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/dr-matthew-walker-the-science-and-practice-of-perfecting-your-sleep 
Healthy Eating & Eating Disorders - Anorexia, Bulimia, Binging (Huberman Lab episode): https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/healthy-eating-and-eating-disorders-anorexia-bulimia-binging 
Dr. Robert Sapolsky: Science of Stress, Testosterone & Free Will (Huberman Lab episode): https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/dr-robert-sapolsky-science-of-stress-testosterone-and-free-will 
Fitness Toolkit: Protocol & Tools to Optimize Physical Health (Huberman Lab episode): https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/fitness-toolkit-protocol-and-tools-to-optimize-physical-health

Timestamps
00:00:00 Tenacity & Willpower
00:01:19 Sponsors: Maui Nui & Helix Sleep
00:03:49 Tenacity & Willpower vs. Habit Execution; Apathy, Depression & Motivation 
00:10:40 Ego Depletion & Willpower as a Limited Resource; Controversy 
00:19:14 Tool: Autonomic Function, Tenacity & Willpower; Sleep & Stress 
00:28:02 Sponsor: AG1
00:28:58 Willpower as a Limited Resource (Theory)
00:35:36 Willpower & Glucose, Brain Energetics
00:42:44 Beliefs about Willpower & Glucose; Multiple Challenges
00:52:43 Sponsor: LMNT
00:54:01 Willpower Brain ‘Hub’; Anorexia Nervosa, Super-Agers
01:07:15 Anterior Midcingulate Cortex & Brain/Body Communication 
01:14:54 Allostasis, Anterior Midcingulate Cortex Function
01:25:19 Anterior Mid-Cingulate Cortex (aMCC), Difficult Tasks & Neuroplasticity
01:29:30 Tool: Novel Physical Exercise & Brain; Cognitive Exercise
01:43:43 Tool: “Micro-sucks”, Increase Tenacity/Willpower
01:50:58 Impossible Tasks, Super-Agers & Learning, Will to Live
01:57:23 Tool: Rewards & Improving Tenacity/Willpower
02:01:07 Tenacity & Willpower Recap
02:05:55 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, YouTube Feedback, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford school of medicine today we are discussing how to build tenacity and willpower previous episodes of The hman Lab podcast have focused on the topic of motivation and while motivation and willpower are linked thematically and mechanistically today we are going to discuss tenac that is the willingness to persist under pressure and resistance of different kinds and willpower which has to do with both the motivation to do things and the motivation to resist certain things today you will learn about the Psychology and Neuroscience of tenacity and willpower and I must tell you this is a fascinating literature in fact you will learn about a brain structure that at least to my knowledge most neuroscientists are not even aware of and yet in researching this episode I absolutely fell in love with this brain structure because of its incredible ability to integrate the very sorts of information from within and from outside of you to harness and build tenacity and willpower and indeed today you will learn research supported tools for how to enhance your level of tenacity and willpower in any circumstance before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is Maui Nei venison Maui Nei venison is the most nutrient-dense and delicious red meat available I've spoken before on this podcast in Solo episodes and with guests about the need to get approximately one gram of highquality protein per pound of body weight each day for optimal nutrition now there are many different ways that one can do that but a key thing is to make sure that you're not doing that by ingesting excessive calories Maui Nei venison has the highest density of quality protein per calorie and it achieves that in delicious things like ground Meats venison steaks jerky and bone broth I particularly like the ground venison I make those into venison burgers probably five times a week or more I also like the jerky for its convenience especially when I'm traveling or I'm especially busy with work and know that I'm getting an extremely nutrient-dense high quality source of protein if you'd like to try Maui Nei venison you can go to mauii Venison docomo and get 20% off your first order again that's Maui venison docomond to get 20% off today's episode is also brought To Us by Helix sleep Helix sleep makes mattresses and pillows that are tailored to your unique sleep needs now sleep is the foundation of mental health physical health and performance when we are sleeping well and enough mental health physical health and performance all stand to be at their best one of the key things to getting a great night's sleep is to make sure that your mattress is tailored to your unique sleep needs Helix sleep has a brief two-minute quiz that if you go to their website you take that quiz and answer questions such as do you tend to sleep on your back your side or your stomach do you tend to run hot or cold in the middle of the night maybe you don't know the answers to those questions and that's fine at the end of that two-minute quiz they will match you to a mattress that's ideal for your sleep needs I sleep on the dusk DUS us mattress and when I started sleeping on a dusk mattress about 2 years ago my sleep immediately improved so if you're interested in upgrading your mattress go to helixsleep.com huberman take their 2-minute sleep quiz and they'll match you to a customized mattress for you and you'll get up to $350 off any mattress order and two free pillows again if interested go to helixsleep.com huberman for up to $350 off and two free pillows okay let's talk about tenacity and willpower and how to enhance your level of tenacity and willpower I will also mention certain cases we're having too much tenacity and willpower can be problematic for mental health and physical health but for most people I believe that enhancing one's level of tenacity and willpower would be advantageous now you'll be relieved to know that while there are a near infinite number of different circumstances where one would need to draw on tenacity and willpower in order to succeed there is one major mechanism within the brain indeed one major mechanism by which tenacity and willower are generated and it arrives through the activation of a particular brain center that is a hub but that is it lies at the interface of many other neural circuits and has input from all the critical neural circuits that one would need in order to generate tenacity and willpower now we are going to return to that particular neural circuit a little bit later after we talk about the psychology of willpower because in talking about the psychology of willpower it will frame up as to why understanding this one particular brain Center or Hub of inputs and outputs from different neural structures in the brain and body will indeed allow you to get the most out of the tools that have been shown in scientific research to enhance your level of tenacity and willpower in other words understanding the psychology of tenacity and willpower while valuable if it's coupled with an understanding of the underlying neural mechanism and notice I use the singular neural mechanism not mechanisms for generating tenacity and willpower will allow you to use and to tailor the specific protocols for enhancing tenacity and willpower to your unique circumstan es so this is yet another case where certainly life circumstances vary from one person to the next the need for tenacity and willpower varies tremendously for instance some people may need more tenacity and willpower in order to engage in certain behaviors others of us might need more tenacity and willpower in order to resist certain types of behaviors today you will learn about the brain Center that governs all of that and then you can frame it within the psychological understanding of tenacity and willpower so that you can get get the most out of the protocols that we will discuss let's start by talking about what tenacity and willpower clearly are and separating tenacity and willpower from some other psychological constructs that they often get confused with because this will be important in understanding exactly what we are trying to build when we say we want to build tenacity and willpower so tenacity and willpower can be distinguished from habit execution habit execution is what you do anytime you wake up in the morning maybe you lie there for a bit maybe get out of bed immediately hopefully you get outside and get some sunlight in your eyes especially on cloudy days go brush your teeth use the restroom engage with others in your home if you live with others Etc all of those sorts of behaviors while on some days can be a bit more challenging especially the get out of bed part maybe you didn't get a great night's sleep the night before for instance but all of those sorts of behaviors are behaviors that you have the neural circuit to generate and that typically you can generate without a lot of willpower required now willpower sometimes also referred to as tenacity grit or persistence is a distinctly different phenomenon than habit execution because willpower and tenacity require that we intervene in our own default neural processes such as habits or particular patterns of thinking and essentially govern ourselves to do or not do some particular thing and that process requires effort it requires energy and I think all of us are familiar with that feeling of effort or energy that's required in order to engage in a behavior that we really don't feel like engaging in or avoiding a behavior or a thought that by default we would naturally just engage in and when I talk about energy in this context I mainly talking about neural energy remember that neurons nerve cells in your brain and body use chemical and electrical signaling to communicate with one another that's what allows you and all of us to do all the things that we do think feel move Etc now of course that chemical and electrical communication requires fuel sources that indeed come from things like glucose ketones the creatine phosphate system multiple fuel systems feed the energetics of the brain But ultimately when I talk about energy in today's discussion I'm talking about the energy required to engage in or to resist in a particular behavior and that level of energy can be quite High depending on how much resistance we are feeling internally or externally right somebody can be telling us you're not going to be able to do this you can't do it and you can say no I have a ton of resolve I have a ton of tenacity willpower and I'm going to push past all the barriers that you are setting up for me on the outside often times all too often I should say we experience resistance from the inside where we are feeling like we don't want to do something or we really want to do something and we are having trouble either engaging in the thing that we don't want to do or that we know we should do but we just don't feel that level of motivation for or we are having a hard time resisting the thing that's pulling us toward it so in that context it's important for us not to just distinguish tenacity and willpower from habit execution but also draw out a Continuum with tenacity and willpower at their most extreme on one end of that Continuum and apathy and yes depression on the other end of that Continuum and we will return to the topic of depression a little bit later but I can just ceue it up right now by saying that one of the Hallmark features of major depression is a lack of positive anticipation about the future that leads to this is important there's a verb tense here that leads to a much lower tendency to engage in the specific types of behavior that would allow one to arrive at a particular new different and positive future so I'm deliberately putting apathy and depression next to one another at one end of the Continuum and I'm putting grit persistence tenacity and willpower at the other end of the Continuum and a little bit later it will be become very clear to you why I put those particular items on the Continuum as opposed to other psychological constructs such as motivation because it turns out that motivation is what allows you to move up and down that Continuum but motivation itself as a verb is distinct from what we call tenacity and willpower and motivation itself is distinct from what we call apathy and depression but motivation is the engine or the motor the verb that allows you to move up and down that Continuum and today you will learn multiple tools that will allow you to move toward the tenacity and willpower end of that Continuum by engaging a very specific neural circuit before we get into the discussion of neural circuits I'd like to talk about the psychology of willpower and this is something that really has been considered by psychologist for well over a hundred years William James wrote about this the ancient Greeks wrote about this the topic of willpower is certainly not a new one and yet the formal study of willpower power in the laboratory context that is bringing human subjects into the laboratory and examining what sorts of conditions allow them to engage their willpower and tenacity what sorts of conditions really sap or drain their willpower and tenacity and of course parallel experiments done in what we call preclinical models which are animal Studies have revealed to us a lot about the sorts of conditions that allow us to generate willpower and the sorts of conditions that drain our willpower now if we are to throw our arms around that entire literature there is a big batch of that literature not the whole batch but there's a big batch of that literature that believed and still believes that willpower is a limited resource much like fuel in the body or fuel in a car now the idea of willpower as a limited resource is certainly not a new idea but again the formal study of willpower and willpower as a limited resource really dates back a little over 20 25 years when Roy bister and colleagues started to explore the idea that of course had been kicked around for years that with each additional decision that we have to engage across the day and with each additional bout of willpower that we have to draw on as a resource that we would drain this reservoir of willpower that we all have within us now bow meister and colleagues refer to that process as ego depletion now when people hear the word ego some people think Freud ego super ego id and so forth most people think ego like somebody having a big personality where they think a lot of themselves when Bal Meister referred to Ego depletion he was defining ego depletion as a concept of oneself and a concept of outside challenges and the degree of effort required to bridge one's concept of self and those challenges and so ego depletion is really a operational construct within the field of psychology so we don't want to get too distracted by that word ego there's a tendency anytime people hear ego if they hear narcissism or if they hear gaslighting to immediately assume that they know what that means when in fact the formal definitions of those quite often differ from the way that they're kicked around on social media the internet and even in a lot of popular writing about psychology okay so let's just note that ego depletion is the term that Bal Meister used to describe the ability for our willpower to be depleted with each successive attempt to engage willpower and by extension our ability to replenish our degree of willpower if we take a break from making decisions and engaging our willpower but ego depletion itself isn't the Focus right now the Focus right now is whether or not indeed willpower is a limited resource and whether or not with each decision that we make and each effort to either engage in an activity that we prefer not to at least in that moment and with each attempt to resist a behavior thought Etc that is pulling on us or that we feel that we want to engage in by default either you know eating the cookie or thinking the thought or engaging in a particular type of behavior of any kind and we need to resist that that it is draining that willpower resource now before I go any further I know that some of you out there are probably aware that ego depletion and the bow Meister theory of willpower as a limited resource has been very contentious especially in recent years and so today what I'm going to do is I'm going to first present present the Bal meister and colleagues work about willpower as a limited resource and then I'm going to present some of the conflicting evidence that Carol D my colleague at Stanford school of medicine and researchers elsewhere have carried out metaanalyses and entirely new experiments which indeed in some cases contradict the findings of Bal Meister but more often than not contradict the conclusions that Bal Meister Drew about willpower so if we are to understand the psychology of willpower and tenacity it's important that we understand and the concepts of ego depletion and willpower as a limited resource even if after hearing all the evidence you decide that willower is not a limited resource and in fact I'm quite confident that once you hear about the bow Meister work and then you hear about the work of DW and others which in some ways counters the conclusions of bow Meister that you'll have a much firmer and certainly much more complete understanding about what tenacity and willpower are and perhaps and here I'm revealing my own leanings when having examined the totality of the data that tenac and willpower in some cases is a limited resource that can be replenished by engaging particular processes within the body that's right within the body but that willpower and tenacity and most importantly how to engage tenacity and willpower especially when you have a lot of challenges in front of you not just one challenge but multiple challenges that need to be carried out throughout the day over weeks over months Etc that tenacity and willpower can be drawn upon repeatedly without them being depleted if you are clear on your beliefs about tenacity and willpower so I realized that what I just brought up was a controversy about something that I haven't even discussed yet so it might seem like a bit of a swirl of information for which there's really no context but the reason I bring up the controversy at this stage of our conversation is that the moment that the words ego depletion or willpower is a limited resource falls out of my mouth I can hear those voices out there saying wait a second I thought that was all debunked and I want to make very clear willpower is a limited resource and ego depletion have not been debunked it's simply a controversial area of psychological research and more importantly for today's discussion we have to understand the theory of willpower as a limited resource if we are to understand the controversy that is the counterargument of what willpower really is that comes from other groups so I really want to give you both sides of the story so that when we get to the underlying neural mechanisms for tenacity and willpower and we get to the tools and protocols for increasing your level of tenacity and willpower and your flexibility of willpower in different contexts that you'll be able to get the most out of those tools and protocols okay so let's take a look at the evidence that willpower is a limited resource I think most of us are familiar with what willpower feels like that is what it feels like to be tenacious and again there are two sides to this coin there's willpower and tenacity of the sort of trying to engage in a behavior when we really don't want to or when our impulse is not to engage in that behavior and I say when our impulse is not to engage in that behavior because often times we want to engage in the behavior we want to study we want to learn the instrument we want to perform well we want to exercise we want the benefits of all those things so it's not that we don't want the outcomes or the rewards of those things and in many cases it's not that we don't enjoy those activities but that for whatever reason we are feeling a lack of motivation we're drifting down that Continuum toward the more apathetic end of things hopefully not all the way to deep depression and apathy but we're drifting that way or we're not far enough up the Continuum and we're not engaging enough motivation to feel like the desire to do something either for its own sake or for the rewards and outcomes of that thing are sufficient to allow us to just do that thing hence the Nike slogan just do it which is a wonderful slogan except that in the absence of any understanding about the mechanisms of how we can get ourselves to just do something oftentimes it falls short and to be honest anytime I hear about people saying well just eliminate the thinking and just do it that is valuable advice until it doesn't work because when it doesn't work it simply doesn't work and then you need to rely on other tools and mechanisms which are the sort that we will talk about today so while I have great respect for the just doit Mantra when it doesn't work it doesn't offer any alternative solutions to engage tenacity and willpower and I do not know anyone on this planet I don't care if you're David Goggins or Courtney dwalter there will be days when telling yourself just do this or just don't do that is not going to be sufficient for you to engage in the behaviors or resist the behaviors or thoughts that you need to engage in or resist that's just reality and we should ask ourselves why is that reality and this is a very important point and in fact really illustrates the first bucket of tools and protocols for increasing tenacity and willpower and these are the tools and protocols that I would categorize under the rubric of modulators I've talked before on this podcast about the important distinction between mediators and modulators mediators are things either psychological or biological Etc that are directly in the mechanisms that generate some sort of action or emotion this could be neurochemicals like dopamine or serotonin and so on modulators are things that can modulate that is can change our probability of doing something or not doing something but they do so indirectly and in the context of tools and protocols to increase our level of tenacity and willpower I would be completely remiss if one of the sets of tools that is the protocols for increasing the probability that we can access high levels of tenacity and willpower didn't include at least some of these modulators so I'm just going to spend about three minutes on these modulators because what we know for certain is that the regions of the brain that generate tenacity and again there is literally a brainhub for generating will power and tenacity gets strong input from the so-called autonomic nervous system the autonomic nervous system has two major components they are referred to as the sympathetic nervous system and the parasympathetic nervous system keep in mind because when most people hear the word sympathetic they think sympathy they think emotion it has nothing to do with that simpa means together and the sympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system I know that's a mouthful is responsible for generating states of alertness in our brain and body everything from Panic to being alert and calm our tendency to move or our likelihood of moving under pressure it is also responsible for our ability to resist movement when we need to resist movement and therefore it's an active process so the sympathetic nervous system is all the things of action and when it is involved in generating inaction those are cases where inaction requires energy okay I want to be very clear about this the sympathetic nervous system isn't just about moving our body although it has a lot to do with that it is also responsible for our ability to resist movement or thought or emotion when we need to do that clamp down on ourselves the parasympathetic aspect of our autonomic nervous system is the one that sometimes referred to as the rest and digest neural circuits and chemicals and that's true but there's a lot more to the parasympathetic component of the autonomic nervous system it's also responsible for falling asleep it's responsible for us feeling relaxed it is responsible for most of the states of Mind and Body in which we are quiescent where we don't feel an Impulse to move or when we have a difficult time getting into action so the sympathetic and the parasympathetic aspect of the autonomic nervous system are always in a push pull with one another think of them more less on a teeter totter when one end goes up the other end goes down they're really in competition with one another and it's their balance that reflects how alert or how sleepy we happen to be now the reason I'm giving you this rather geeky nerd nomenclature filled discussion about the autonomic nervous system in the context of willpower is that regardless of whether or not you believe willpower is a limited or an unlimited resource we know one thing for sure and that's that willpower and tenacity ride on our current autonomic function we can translate that to Everyday Language by saying that when we we are well rested for instance when we've been getting great sleep of sufficient duration the previous night and the night before that our level of tenacity and willpower to engage in things that we would not ordinarily engage in by default and our ability to resist behaviors and thought patterns that would otherwise be our default behaviors and thought patterns is much higher conversely when we are not getting enough quality sleep on a regular basis our ability to call on tenacity and willpower is diminished now that series of statements I just made is clearly going to be a duh for most people but it is very important to understand that when we are sleep deprived when we are in physical pain when we are in emotional pain and or when we are distracted when we are thinking about something else aside from what we are trying to engage tenacity and willpower in order to do or not do tenacity and willpower will be diminished now all of those things together are just a bigger duh we all know this if you got a splinter in your foot it's really hard to think about not thinking about something else if you are extremely hungry or if you had an argument with somebody that you really care about and they said something that was particularly vexing to you and it's looping around in your head it's going to be very hard to engage in something else that you need to do because you're going to be distracted likewise if you're sleep deprived likewise if you are a bit sick or run down or if you're in any kind of physical or emotional pain your ability to draw on tenacity and willpower will be diminished so it's an absolute truth that your ability to generate tenacity and willpower rides on a reservoir of autonomic function and today we don't really have a way of quantifying the level of autonomic function or dysfunction in a very simple way it's not like resting heart rate although resting heart rate is involved for instance if you haven't slept well for a few nights or if you're particularly stressed overtrained you wake up in the morning with a significantly elevated heart rate however there is no simple metric like heart rate or blood pressure or even cortisol level that can tell you whether or not your autonomic function is imbalance that is the sympathetic and parasympathetic systems of your autonomic nervous system are in the best possible balance to generate tenacity and willpower we don't yet have such a metric although there are companies that are starting to develop devices that hopefully will give us indices of autonomic function or dysfunction but it is important that we acknowledge that if you're not taking care of the foundational modulators of tenacity and willpower none of the subsequent tools and protocols that we will discuss are going to help you that much over time you might get tenacity and willpower to engage one day when you're very sleep deprived but it's going to be very difficult to consistently engage tenacity and willpower for that reason if you have any struggles with sleep that is getting enough quality sleep on a regular basis please see the zero cost toolkit for sleep that we've put at hubman lab.com please also see the perfecty Sleep Mastery sleep episodes also at huberman lab.com and please also see the episode with expert guest Dr Matthew Walker professor of sleep neuroscience and psychology at University of California Berkeley we just revamped the huberman lab website so if you go to hubman lab.com and you put something like sleep into the search function it will take you not just to the toolkit for sleep but to the exact time stamps that will queue up particular topics and protocols around sleep so if you were to put sleep and light it would take you to those particular protocols if you were to put sleep and magnesium 3 and8 it would take you to those particular protocols and so on and so forth okay I don't want to get too far off topic here during today's discussion but if you're not sleeping well and if you're not managing your stress levels well it's going to be much harder for you to engage tenacity and willpower regardless of the tools you happen to use and those tools could be everything from behavioral tools to supplements to prescription drugs you need to get those foundational mod ators in check and there are a lot of zeroc cost ways to do that that are all spelled out very clearly at the resources I just described likewise for stress if you're experiencing challenges with stress both short-term medium-term or long-term stress if you think you have elevated cortisol levels which by the way may not be the case there are a lot of tools for modulating stress in real time increasing your stress threshold Etc simply go to the hubon lab.com website and put in stress threshold tools or stress realtime tools and you'll get a bunch of zero cost tools will allow you to do that it's also worth mentioning that when we get to our discussion about the Neuroscience of tenacity and willpower that you will understand why autonomic health and autonomic function is so important for our ability to engage tenacity and willpower I'll just tell you right now it's because the neural circuits of the autonomic nervous system provide direct and robust input to this Hub in the brain this brain location that governs our ability to allocate our mind and body toward particular activities or to resist particular activities as many of you know I've been taking ag1 daily since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast ag1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that's designed to meet all of your foundational nutrition needs now of course I try to get enough servings of vitamins and minerals through whole food sources that include vegetables and fruits every day but often times I simply can't get enough servings but with ag1 I'm sure to get enough vitamins and minerals and the probiotics that I need and it also contains adaptogens to help buffer stress simply put I always feel better when I take ag1 I have more focus and energy and I sleep better and it also happens to taste great for all these reasons whenever I'm asked if you could take Just One supplement what would it be I answer ag1 if you'd like to try ag1 go to drink a1.com huberman to claim a special offer they'll give you five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 again that's drink a1.com / huberman okay so let's think about the bow Meister data on Willpower as a limited resource I'm going to briefly describe one of the first studies that really said to the field willpower is a limited resource but I want to be clear that there are other studies like it and they all generally follow the same contour and that General Contour is as follows bow meister and colleagues and now many other Laboratories have done experiments where they bring human subjects into the laboratory and those human subjects have to do something that requires mental effort or energy AKA willpower the classic example of this is you bring people into the laboratory some of them might actually be dieting or fasted although not always and there are two platters set out for them one platter contains radishes just plain radishes by the way I hate radishes unless they're pickled radishes I don't know why that is so these experiments picked my least favorite vegetable I love many other vegetables I disdain the radish that was just a personal editorial in any case the radishes are set out and next to them are freshly baked cookies and in the room is the wafting Aromas of freshly baked cookies so I think it's fair to say that most people because of a hardwired tendency to like sugar and fat especially when they are combined would prefer to eat the cookies versus the radishes I know that there are some mutant out there they're saying I like radishes more than cookies but look most people like cookies more than radishes the subjects in these studies are divided into two groups one group is told you have to resist eating the radishes the other group is told you have to resist eating the cookies and then the subjects are observed during this time typically but this is really not what the experiment is about per se this stage of the experiment is really designed to get people to resist a certain kind of behavior and the assump assion again this is an assumption because there's no brain recordings here no one's in an MRI machine looking at what brain areas are activated or not activated there's no cortisol being measured at least not in these early experiments these people are either resisting something that's pretty easy to resist radishes or they are being asked to resist something that for most people is going to be harder to resist than resisting radishes which is resisting freshly baked cookies and that challenge has been made even more Difficult by the wafting Aromas of freshly baked cookies in the room and in some cases has been made even more difficult because these people are dieting and keep in mind that when you calorie restrict or when you put yourself on a diet of any kind there is a wellestablished mechanism in the brain by which the neurons that engage hunger especially hunger for fat and sugar and that respond to things like Aromas and taste are heightened that is their activity levels are heightened which means that things that smell really good smell really really good when you're hungry things that ordinarily would taste really good taste really really really good when you finally eat them so the key component of this stage of the experiment is to engage people's willpower the second part of the experiment has all of the subjects separately engage in another challenging task and the challenging task that they are asked to engage in is to solve a particular puzzle and again different experiments used different puzzles different experiments use different contexts but the original experiments that b meister and colleagues did had people try and solve a puzzle that could not be solved so it's very very difficult in fact it's impossible but the subjects weren't aware of that and then what was measured was how long subjects persisted in trying to solve this impossible to solve puzzle depending on whether or not previously they had to resist the radishes which is pretty easy to resist or resist the cookies which is at least harder to resist and for some people would be very very hard to resist now you can probably already guess what the outcome of this and similar studies was because it birthed this entire belief Camp within the field of psychology that willpower is a limited resource the outcome was that if people had to resist the cookies which is harder to do than resisting the radishes that they would persist for less time when they had to try and solve a puzzle that unbeknownst to them could not be solved conversely if people had to resist something that was pretty easy to resist such as resisting eating radishes something that for me would be very very easy to resist well when they were subsequently faced with trying to solve a very difficult indeed impossible to solve puzzle they persisted much longer okay so put very simply the study concluded that if you have to resist one thing and it's a hard thing to resist well then you have less air quotes here resistance in you willpower to engage in another difficult task subsequently whereas if you had an easy challenge just prior or no challenge just prior to being faced with a challenge such as a very difficult puzzle well then you had more resource more willpower to apply to the solving of that puzzle so the conclusion that b meister and colleagues Drew from those results was that willpower is a limited resource but it didn't specify nor did they specify exactly what that limited resource is and this was quite an attractive Theory because it jived well with most people's perception of what willpower and tenacity was for them this idea that yes there are things that challenge us both to do and to resist but that we can do that but when we are asked to do that again and again and again while we may build up some capacity to engage our willpower and tenacity it and of course there are those rare individuals that we've heard about and some of us know that seem to have just a kind of bottomless reservoir of willpower and tenacity most of us have an intuitive understanding of how hard it is to constantly be in friction with life to constantly have to push ourselves to do things and to resist things and that while that capacity can expand and grow and we can get better at it that there does seem to be something here just subjectively speaking there does seem to be something about engaging tenacity and willpower that yeah it can feel good but it also requires effort this neural energy that we were talking about so that raised the question of okay if willpower is a limited resource what exactly is that resource at a physiological level so balme and colleagues subsequently went on to explore what I think is a really interesting and clever idea frankly I can't confess that I would have thought of this but they did they said okay you know in some cases people are are eating the cookie and then they're engaging in this very difficult puzzle in other cases they're eating the radish and engaging in this difficult puzzle and of course other experiments used non-food challenging choices but they came up with an idea which was the brain as one of the most metabolically active organs in our entire body if not the most metabolically active organ in our entire body requires a lot of fuel it requires a lot of glucose now of course the brain mainly runs on GL glucose but if you're following a ketogenic diet your brain will mainly run on ketones but for most people who are omnivores or eating carbohydrates glucose is the main and preferred fuel source for neurons for nerve cells in your brain and body for that matter Bal moister and colleagues raised the hypothesis that perhaps glucose availability itself is the resource that's limiting willpower and in a whole set of experiments they really showed that if people are asked to do a difficult task to engage their willpower and this could be done by resisting a particular Behavior or by engaging in a particular Behavior I'll just give you an example of engaging in a particular behavior that requires willpower or at least focus and mental energy to contrast it with the resisting radishes versus resisting cookies example that I gave earlier one common practice within experiments like this is to give people a very long passage of words so it's a story and then to give them some sort of rule about how to edit that passage maybe they have to cross out every third e or the E that arrive in the middle of sentences next to consonants but not other vowels you know stuff that takes a lot of energy so these are DOs as opposed to resisting behaviors like we were talking about earlier resisting the radish resisting the cookies although in many of these experiments there's a command to do something you know cross out certain letter E in this passage but also to resist the reflex to cross out other ease and of course all this is is under time pressure and often times it's being rewarded or scored this is the way that psychology researchers get people to engage in particular uh experiments and behaviors and resist certain things in the context of a laboratory environment when those things frankly are kind of boring and meaningless they'll pay you more if you do well at the task um they'll give you money and then subtract the money that you're going to get at the end of the experiment if you make errors and things like that and they'll do it under time constraint as I mentioned earlier so there were lots of different conditions were again here air quotes draining people's willpower and tenacity and certainly draining their mental attention and then they would have them do another subsequent task so in many ways this just mirrors the first cookie radish experiment done by Bal meister and colleagues but there was an important intervention put between the first and the second hard task and that intervention was to give one group a glucose beverage of about 150 calories or so so they would drink a glucose beverage to increase levels of blood glucose the preferred fuel source for the brain versus giving them an artificially flavored drink or just water or something that was of course matched for flavor but that did not contain any glucose or calories now this is a clever experimental design if you think about it because at least at a first glance the only thing that really seems to be different is the availability of glucose for the brain and you can probably guess what the outcome of these studies was the outcome of these studies was that when subjects are given glucose in between a first hard task that required willpower and a second hard task that required willpower and in some experiments a third hard task that required willpower that their levels of willpower were maintained consistently from one task to the next and in some cases increased from one task to the next if they had more glucose available because they drank this glucose drink so what's really interesting and frankly really nice about these studies is that they attemp tempted to bridge a psychological construct like tenacity and willpower and to test the argument that willpower is an Expendable resource and yet it's an Expendable resource that is replenishable by linking that to a physiological variable and the physiological variable they linked it to was glucose availability in the brain now this set the field of psychology and in fact the field of pop psychology that is the discussion about formal findings in the field of formal psychological research Ablaze people were so excited about this I mean this set of findings really pointed to the argument that if you could just keep levels of brain glucose elevated across your day or at least stable across the day that you would have more willpower and tenacity this thing that humans have been seeking more of since the beginning of time now all of that seemed fine and good and in fact a lot of products and courses were born out of that literature people were arguing that you should sip on glucose drink while doing any kind of hard task that you should sip on glucose drinks between tasks that you should be thinking about literally fuel that you ingest into your body as fuel for psychological processes within your brain that would allow you to perform better in work in school in athletics and relationships and all of the domains of life but of course anytime there is a prominence or a real excitement about a particular finding in any field of science but in particular in Psychology where it feels so applicable as did the Bal Meister results you are going to get other groups that are going to try and replicate those findings and that are going to dig into the findings themselves and look at the statistics look at how well or poorly powered those studies were we don't want to get into a full discussion about powering studies right now but powering studies has a lot to do with addressing the question of whether or not there were enough subjects in the study to really draw the conclusion that one Drew or whether or not the statistics fell out out as yes there was a significant effect of glucose ingestion on Willpower and tenacity but if there weren't enough subjects well then there are other variables that could potentially explain those results so there were a lot of metaanalyses and other studies trying to replicate the work of Bal meister and that's where things got controversial now we can take a step back from all of that controversy after all we don't want to spend too much time on the controversy itself rather we want to know what the counter interpretation of the bow Meister results was and I want to be very clear there was no real dispute as to whether or not bow Meister got the results that he and his colleagues claimed to have obtained they did get those results the question really was about the interpretation is willpower a limited resource and if it is is the physiological resource itself glucose availability to the brain so in 2013 a colleague of mine at Stanford Dr Carol D and our department of psychology did a study in which she examined this idea that willpower is a limited resource and the idea that the resource that's limited is glucose availability for the brain so D and colleagues did an experiment that in many ways mirrored the overall organization of the experiments done by Bow meister and colleagues there was a difficult task some cases the difficult task was that Crossing out of particular ease within a passage task followed by another difficult task and the difficult task that came second was the Stroop task this is a task I've talked about before on this podcast although some episodes ago so those of you that are not familiar with the STP task the STP task is where subjects are presented with words in different colors and they are instructed to either read the word so to pay attention to the content of the word or to the color in which the font of the word is written this might seem pretty easy to most of you right if I put up a card that says apple on it and apple is written in green you probably wouldn't have a hard time if you had been instructed to tell me what color is the word written in for you to say green okay but if I I were to hold up a card that said red but the font is actually in the color green it's a little bit harder and if I were to then do that for a 100 cards or 300 cards and put you under time pressure where you're losing money that you're sure to get if you make mistakes or you will earn money at the end of the experiment if you get answers correctly well then you start making more mistakes that's just the way these experiments work so they did a variation on the strep task that isn't exactly the way I just described it and the stoop task by the way is one that's used to probe prefrontal cortex function this area of our brain right behind our foreheads that is responsible for many things but in part is responsible for context and strategy setting given a particular set of rules so if you get onto the bus or get onto the subway versus walk into a black tie dinner the context and rules are very very different as to what you would say or not say how you would behave how you would dress your prefrontal cortex is largely although Al though not entirely is largely responsible for a lot of the context setting and Rule setting from one situation to the next and if you think about the stre task it's really just a context dependent strategy task you either have to pay attention to the meaning of the words or the colors in which those words are written and the number of mistakes that you'll make depends on how much time pressure you're under what sorts of neurologic or psychiatric challenges you might be facing or not facing so on and so forth but it's a very robust task that's existed in the scientific literature for a long period of time so the D experiment and by the way there were actually three experiments in this paper I won't go through all of them in detail for sake of time but I will provide a link to the paper in the show note captions but the major focus of the study was to have people engage in one hard task and then in another hard task both of which draw on Willpower testing the idea that willpower is a limited resource and then providing some of those subjects with a glucose-rich drink or other subjects with a drink that was artificially sweetened so it had no glucose no calor calories but tasted yes they match them for taste I know some of you don't like artificial sweeteners are saying those don't taste exactly like real sugar but they managed to match these drinks for Taste but in one case the drink would clearly increase blood glucose in the other case the drink would not raise blood glucose so the results of this study are really spectacular in my mind because what this study found was that yes indeed ingesting glucose can improve performance on these multiple challenging willpower requiring tasks however the degree to which the glucose containing drink could improve performance depended on whether or not you believed that willpower was a limited resource and whether or not you believed that resource was glucose in other words if you hear and believe that willpower is a limited resource well then indeed with each subsequent task that you engage in or life event of any kind that you engage in that requires willpower and tenacity you will have less willpower and tenacity to draw on whereas if you believe that willpower and tenacity are unlimited and in fact are divorced from blood glucose as the physiological source of willpower and tenacity well then you can engage in one challenging task and another challenging task and another challenging task without any diminishment in performance now that of course leaves us all in a very tough position because how are we to decide what to believe if we know that willpower can be a limited resource or willpower cannot be a limited resource ah well the results of the direct study and by the way I should share with you the title of the study the title of the study not surprisingly is beliefs about willpower determine the impact of glucose on self-control and this was a study published in the proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences again I'll provide a link to this study in the show note captions there are three major experiments in this study as I mentioned before I just gave you the major conclusion of all of them sort of woven together and if it wasn't clear already the major conclusions are that yes ingesting glucose can improve your ability to engage tenacity and willpower AKA self-control from one task to the next provided that you believe that glucose is the limiting resource for engaging tenacity and willpower if you don't believe that well then you can engage tenacity and willpower without ingesting glucose and that's where the artificially flavored drink comes in I'll leave it to you to kind of unpack what that means experimentally but it's a very clever experimental design that DW and colleagues came up with because it argues that yes indeed it's hard to do a challenging thing right after another challenging thing but there's no reason to think that you can't do both of those things while engaging the utmost tenacity and willpower if you believe that tenacity and willpower exist within you as a single mechanism that can be harnessed and that it's not a single mechanism that has a reservoir that runs down as you engage in one hard thing thing to the next now this is very important because we are about to transition into our discussion of the physiological that is the neural underpinnings of tenacity and willpower which as it turns out is one major set of brain circuits now there could be others that are yet to be discovered but we know that there is one major set of brain circuits in particular one brain area believe it or not that an entire collection of more than two dozen studies really points to as the seat the or of what we call tenacity and willpower but before we transition to that and the tools and protocols that that physiological neural understanding set forth for us to all use and apply I'd be remiss if I didn't mention that bow Meister wasn't about to hear these results from dwen colleagues and just say Okay willpower is not a limited resource it's not blood glucose it's all what you believe about willpower it's all what you believe about blood glucose rather BME himself went back to the lab and did subsequent experiments that in some ways not all counter the d results so I'm not trying to confuse anybody but I wouldn't be doing my job if I didn't give you both sides of the story now the good news is that the tools and protocols that we are going to arrive at work regardless of which psychological Camp you happen to be in the bow Meister camp or the D camp now I don't want to give the impression that these are Waring camps and I also don't want to give the impression that these are the only two camps of thought and experimentation within the field of tenacity and willpower there are many groups working on these subjects indeed there have been metaanalyses that have confirmed the major theories of Bal meister and there are metaanalyses that have refuted the major findings of Bal Meister I will provide links in the show note captions to a couple examples of each so that you have those to peruse if you like but let's discuss for a moment what B Meister found when they went back and re- researched I think that's a word re researched the idea that willpower is a limited resource and that glucose is the that limiting resource balme and colleagues looked at the D data and said okay fine the data looked great except for the fact that in real life and in many previous experiments that they and others had done it wasn't just two hard challenges back toback but often two or three or four and what Bal meister and others found was that when subjects are presented not with just two challenges back to back but three or more challenges so back to back to back to back challenge is that have to engage a lot of neural energy a lot of willpower tenacity resistance to do certain things and effort to engage in certain kinds of behaviors and cognitive processes that when subjects had glucose available to them in the brain by way of ingesting these glucose drinks sipping those in between the tasks sometimes even during the tasks that their performance that is their willpower and tenacity to engage in challenges was maintained across those multiple challenges and they conceded that one's belief about willpower could indeed dictate whether or not willpower was or was not a limited resource and whether glucose would or would not enhance one's ability to engage willpower but they argued that if one confronts multiple challenging circumstances as is very naturalistic as we say it's very typical of everyday real life then the availability of glucose during and between tasks the ability for the brain to engage in its external environment and take reads of its internal environment how we feel inside relative to what's expected of us was very valuable in allowing people to engage this thing that psychologically we describe as tenacity and willpower I'd like to just take a brief break and thank one of our sponsors which is element element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't that means plenty of salt sodium magnesium and potassium the so so called electrolytes and no sugar now salt magnesium and potassium are critical to the function of all the cells in your body in particular to the function of your nerve cells also called neurons now people of course have varying levels of requirements for sodium so people with hypertension or prehypertension probably shouldn't increase their sodium however many people are surprised to find that by increasing their sodium intake they are able to function better cognitively and physically and that's because a lot of people especially people who are following low carbohydrate or even moderate carbohydrate and really clean diets often times they're excreting a lot of water and electrolytes along with it and simply by increasing their electrolyte intake using element they just feel better and function better I typically drink element first thing in the morning when I wake up in order to hydrate my body and make sure I have enough electrolytes and while I do any kind of physical training and certainly I drink element in my water when I'm in the sauna and after going in the sauna because that causes quite a lot of sweating if you'd like to try element you can go to drink element that's lm.com huberman to claim a free element sample pack with your purchase again that's drink element lnt.com huberman let's talk about the physiology of tenasity and willpower and I assure you that the conversation we are about to have is not going to be just a bunch of nomenclature and mechanistic understanding of the origins of tenacity and willpower rather it argues that tenacity and willpower have a unified source that is a specific set of brain areas that when active engage that feeling of tenacity and willpower regardless of what we are confronted with regardless of whether or not we are trying to engage in something that reflexively we wouldn't otherwise want to engage in and regardless of whether or not we are confronted with something that we have to resist and to me that's extremely reassuring because whether or not you believe that blood glucose is the limiting resource for willpower whether or not you believe that your beliefs about willpower and blood glucose impact your level of willpower what we know for sure is that there's a single set of brain circuits indeed there's a single brain area that seems to be able to largely if not entirely explain this phenomenon that we call tenacity and willpower and that should be reassuring because what it means is that tenacity and willpower is the reflection of a neural circuit function that is a skill it's an expression of something that we all have within us we all have this particular brain area and quite excitingly this is the third point this brain area is highly subject to plasticity there are specific things that we can do and there are specific mindsets that we can adopt that allow us to increase the activity of this particular brain area indeed to increase the size of this particular brain area so that we can call on tenacity and willpower not just in one circumstance like school or musical learning or athletic Endeavors or relationship Endeavors but rather that we can call on this brain area in the context of any and all circumstan ances where willpower and tenacity are required now we talk about Neuroscience a lot on this podcast but it's not often that I point to a particular brain area and can confidently say this particular brain area has an absolutely integral role in something as kind of highlevel psychological as tenacity and willpower but today we can do that and that's because there's a collection of more than two dozen studies that point to one particular brain area and of course its connections with other brain areas because no single brain area operates in isolation every brain area is operating in the context of neural circuits other brain areas that it receives inputs from and gives inputs to and so on but this one particular brain area really does seem to underly what we call tenacity and willpower and we know that through several lines of evidence first of all I'll tell you the name of the brain area although the name itself isn't going to tell you much unless you're a neuroscientist or anatomist so I'll give a little bit of background about it the name of the brain area is the anterior mid singulate cortex the anterior mid singulate cortex is part of a larger brain area called the singulate cortex and in humans versus animals it goes by slightly different names unfortunately it's just one of the consequences of different researchers and different Labs calling the same thing different things it could be really frustrating but we'll make it very simple because today we were referred to this area as the anterior mid singulate cortex which is a sub div vision of a larger brain area simply called the singulate cortex the anterior mid singulate cortex resides in the frontal loes so it's behind your forehead although that doesn't tell you anything because all of your brain is behind your forehead if you think about it and it's about a third of the way back toward the back of your head and you actually have two of these structures two anterior mid singulate cortices one on each side of the brain and they receive a lot of inputs from a lot of different areas and we'll talk about what those areas are because this is extremely important when thinking about the different psychological and physiological resources that you can draw upon to engage tenacity and willpower but for the time being let me just go through the evidence in kind of list format of why we feel so confident that the anterior mid singulate cortex is such a vital hub for engaging tenacity and willpower for each of these points that I'm about to make there is indeed at least one if not several quality reviewed studies in humans so there's a lot of data from animals both rodents and primate models Etc that we're not talking about today but I should mention all of which supports the human data and vice versa the data I'm going to describe now come from humans and from a variety of different types of studies so there are a lot of different ways that one can consider if a brain area is implicated in a given psychological or physiological phenomenon like motivation or sadness or visual perception and those include for instance if a brain area is active during a given phenomenon so one way to explore this is to put literally wire electrodes down below the skull record the electric activity of neurons and assess whether or not the electrical activity of those neurons changes when a person is say viewing faces or feeling a particular way like feeling tenacious or feeling bored or feeling aggressive and so on another way of assessing a particular brain area's role in a given physiological or psychological phenomenon is in individuals where that particular brain area is injured you might expect that a particular phenomenon like willpower like the ability to perceive faces is present or absent whether not it's exacerbated or whether or not it's diminished other ways of assessing whether or not a given brain area is involved in a given phenomenon is whether or not that brain area literally changes size whether or not changes in volume over the course of some sort of training so for instance if somebody is not able to play a musical instrument such as myself and then I or a subject in one of these experiments learns a musical instrument and the volume the size of the particular brain area is assessed across the learning or simply before and after that musical learning and it grows or perhaps even if it shrinks or changes shape one might determine that it is somehow somehow involved in the process of learning a musical instrument you couldn't unequivocally conclude that but along with other types of evidence one could perhaps conclude that so that's just a partial list of ways to assess brain area function other ways include assessing what other areas a given brain area gets input from so for instance in the case of the anterior mid singulate cortex we will soon discuss the fact that it gets robust input from the autonomic nervous system which you already learned about it gets robust input from reward systems of the brain such as the dopamine and serotonin based reward systems of the brain and it gets robust input from the context and strategy setting areas of the brain as well and many other different brain areas so there's a structural logic as to why the anterior mid singulate cortex would be involved in tenacity and willpower but no single anatomical or physiological or lesion-based finding is as compelling as when we consider all of the results about the anterior mid singulate cortex together and side by side so for instance recordings by neural Imaging of the anterior mid singul cortex in an unbiased way meaning people are put into a brain scanner and brain activity is examined and mass all of the brain areas are looked at and people are presented with either a hard task or an easy task revealed that the anterior mid singulate cortex shows elevated levels of activity in the hard versus the easy task and again I want to point out that the researchers were not looking for that result they simply observed that result in addition if people who exhibit high levels of academic performance across many different subjects are put into a brain scanner that evaluates so-called resting state connectivity so no task but simply levels of activity in different brain areas that occur spontaneously so they're just sitting in the scanner looking at a blank screen the resting or spontaneous levels of activity in the anterior mid singulate cortex of high achieving individuals is higher relative to those of lower achieving individuals in addition people that have lesions or disruptions of anterior mid singulate cortical function show increased apathy and depression and reduced levels of tenacity and motivation across the board regardless of what domain of life one is asking about whether or not it's athletic or academic Etc indeed successful dieters show elevated spontaneous and what's called evoked levels of activity in the anterior mid singulate cortex so spontaneous again just at rest they have higher levels of activity in the anterior mid singulate cortex and for those that are presented with food and they have to resist that food and they have to resist the smell of that food and the potential taste of that food the activity of the anterior mid singulate cortex goes up even further especially in those individuals who can resist that is who can engage willpower to not eat the delicious food item conversely individuals that have failed to exert sufficient willpower to lose their desired weight and this was for medical reasons related to trying to achieve Medical Health as well as people who are obese seem to have diminished levels of activity in the anterior mid singulate cortex in addition people who are depressed who Express a lot of apathy and here we're talking about clinically diagnosed major depression show reduced levels of activity in the anterior mid singulate cortex humans that Express a lot of what's called learned helplessness that is they've adopted the belief and the actions associated with the belief that no matter what they do the outcomes are not going to be what they desire Express lower levels of neural activity in the anterior mid singulate cortex so you can see this list goes on and on but it in fact gets even more interesting remember earlier I mentioned that successful dieters have elevated levels of neural activity in the anterior mid singulate cortex now that might seem like a good thing and indeed it can be a good thing but there's a pathologic condition associated with dieting and one's ability to engage willpower and resist food and that's in the case of eating disord such as anorexia nervosa now I've done a hubman Lab podcast solo episode about anorexia nervosa and on that podcast I made the point that I'll make again now which is that anorexia nervosa is the most deadly of all the psychiatric conditions leading to death in a very large percentage of people that have it now fortunately there are treatments and more emerging all the time but it's a very serious psychological and physiological condition that is extremely deadly individuals with anorexia nervosa exhibit heightened levels of activity in their anterior mid singulate cortex both at rest and when presented with food and I don't want to go on a full tangent about anorexia because we covered anorexia on the previous podcast episode about anorexia which by the way you can find at hubman lab.com simply search anorexia or eating disorders within the search function but one of the clear symptoms of anorexia nervosa is that the reward Pathways of the brain which we know feed into that is direct connections to the anterior mid singulate cortex seem to be activated under conditions in which people with anorexia avoid food as opposed to eat food and then there's a very interesting and positive literature about so-called super aers so what we know for sure is that as people age in particular between the ages of 60 and 90 there's a reduction in the size of many brain areas but the anterior mid singulate cortex in particular unless certain things are done to offset that we are going to talk about what those particular things are in just a few minutes but there's a particular category of humans that's alive now and that live a very long time these are the people that stand the greatest chance of becoming centenarians and many of them are centenarians so-called superagers but also within the category of superagers are people who are 60 years old or more because not all of them have reached 80 90 yet and have the cognition of 40 olds 30y olds and often even of people in their mid 20s now there are a lot of things that are different about these super agers super aers in the sense that they are maintaining very youthful levels of cognition but one of the things that's become very apparent from the neuroimaging data is that super agers maintain a volume a size of the anterior mid singulate cortex that is significantly greater than their ag- matched cohorts so the exciting thing is that there are many many lines of evidence pointing to the fact that the anterior mid singulate cortex at least has something to do with our ability to generate tenacity and willpower and that it when active moves us up that Continuum away from apathy and depression toward states of being able to engage in or resist particular types of behaviors so what I just described as a bunch of neuroimaging structural volume data blood uptake data lesion studies and so on and so forth but we can simplify all of that and in fact address something that perhaps I should have said earlier which is that when we're talking about tenacity and willpower we're really talking about one of two things we are either talking about that sense within us that has us saying I will no matter what you tell me no matter what you put in front of me no matter what is rolled my way I will blank now the other expression of tenacity and willpower is that within us within you within me when tenacity and willpower are active we have that sense within us that feeling in our body and that thought pattern AKA feeling in our brain that no matter what you say no matter what you do no matter what you put in front of me I won't so really willpower is either an expression of I will or I absolutely will is perhaps a better way to State it or I absolutely won't now that might seem like just a simple subjective reordering of a bunch of physiological data and psychology studies but it's not it's actually far more important for us to understand this I absolutely will and I absolutely won't aspect of willpower because if indeed there is a single brain area that can govern willpower and willpower is not one but is at least two things the sense of I absolutely will no matter what you say do Etc or I absolutely won't no matter what you say do Etc well then this brain area can't be a simple switch it can't be willpower on Willow off willpower on Willow off it can't be absolute as we say it must be graded it must have levels so it's more like a slider on a light switch than an on versus off light switch in addition to that if there is truly one brain area that plays a critical role in generating tenacity and willpower and tenacity and willpower is something that it's required from us in a lot of different contexts where we have to say I absolutely will yes this I absolutely won't know that I absolutely will also yes this etc etc right because life is complex even just the simple thing of say dieting or trying to get a particular degree or trying to navigate even a simple illness like I'm going to get through this weak despite feeling lousy I'm going to take good care of myself you know all of these things in some sense require tenacity and willpower and the behaviors we need to engage in and avoid engaging in is very Dynamic depending not just on who we are and what we're trying to do or not do but also where we are that day that moment well that means that the anterior mid singulate cortex also needs access to information about context it needs to understand what's rewarding or non-rewarding in the cont of what we're trying to accomplish not just what feels good in the moment now fortunately there have been a number of studies exploring not just the activity levels of the anterior mid singulate cortex or the size of the anterior mid singulate cortex in the various conditions we talked about before depression obesity successful dieters successful students successful athletes Etc but a lot of anatomical tracing studies both from fixed that is from Dead brain tissue so postmortem brain tissue in humans but also nowadays they're certain types of neuroimaging particular something called diffusion tensor Imaging that allows one to examine the flow of information in and out of different brain areas through so-called white matter tracks tracks meaning TR r a CTS track so these are the wires that connect neurons are called axons and those axons are in sheathed with a fatty substance called myelin and that enement with milin allows them to transmit information very quickly you'll see where I'm going with all this in just a moment and what we know is that the anterior mid singulate cortex again of which you have one on each side of the brain about a third of the way back from your forehead to the back of your brain approximately right above the so-call Corpus colossum this very robust collection of white matter tracks that connects the two sides of the brain well it gets input and sends input to a number of different brain areas including but not limited to the following autonomic centers that control for instance cardiovascular f function increases or decreases in heart rate respiration how fast and how deeply you breathe or how shallowly and slowly you breathe immune system inputs and outputs with the spleen not directly but through a couple of different stations with the very organs in your body that can release B cells and t- cells and immune molecules that can combat bacterial viral and fungal infections and that can repair physical wounds and it communicates with the endocrine system with the systems of the brain and body that release for instance estrogen and testosterone which by the way are present in both males and females and on a previous episode of The hubman Lab podcast with Robert spolski as my guest we talked about for instance the role of testosterone and many people think oh testosterone is all about aggression testosterone is all about attack testosterone is all about mating that is completely false while it can be involved in those different processes what Dr spolski and I discussed is that one of the major functions of testosterone in the brain is to make effort feel good and you can see and we'll talk a little bit more about how that links up very directly with this concept of tenacity and willpower so the first point is that the anterior mid singulate cortex is in direct communication with all of the areas of the brain and through a couple of other stations the body that modulate our sense of tenacity and willpower which we talked about earlier the need for Sleep the need for pain pain or lack of pain or emotional Comfort or discomfort to modulate our level of tenacity and willpower the interior mid singulate cortex is also directly linked up with premotor centers these are the centers of the brain that organize particular patterns of behavior and indeed that can suppress particular patterns of behavior as I tell you that you're probably filling in the blanks this is engaging in a behavior or resisting a behavior the interior mid singulate cortex is also directly wired in with the reward Pathways of the brain it can trigger the release of dopamine it can also respond to the release of dopamine and that dopamine release could be generated behaviorally it could be generated through some sort of food reward it could be pharmacologic there are a number of different ways that the dopamine system can communicate with the anterior mid singulate cortex the point here is that it is in direct communication with the anterior mid singulate cortex and the anterior mid singulate cortex is in direct communication with the dopamine system and what I just gave you was frankly just a partial list of the different areas of the brain that are communicating robustly with the anterior mid singulate cortex it gets information about interoception our readout of how we feel in our body it also has robust inputs and outputs with the areas of the brain that are associated with exteroception our perception of what is out around us so all of that provides a logical basis for the neuroimaging data the lesion data the volumetric data that we talked about a few minutes ago in the context of depression anxiety high performance anorexia and so on but one of the most important arguments that's ever been made in favor of the anterior mid singulate cortex being a major seat for tenacity and willpower comes from Dr Lisa Feldman Barrett who is soon to be a guest on the hubman Lab podcast we've actually recorded that episode already and it should be out very soon Lisa's laboratory is well known for pioneering research on emotion and affect I strongly encourage you to listen to that episode once it comes out and it was actually Lisa herself that cued me to the importance of the anterior mid singulate cortex and Lisa and colleagues have written several spectacular reviews about the anterior mid singulate cortex and its role in tenacity and motivation I will provide links to a few of those in the show note captions the one that I'm particularly excited about the one that I've spent now an immense amount of time with is entitled The tenacious brain how the enter mid singulate cortex contributes to achieving goals so if you have a background in biology even if you don't I think you'll find that review view to be very interesting and it further substantiates a lot of the points that I made a few moments ago about the different scenarios and types of individuals that seem to be able to engage their anterior mid singulate cortex under different conditions and to a greater or lesser extent than others so hats off to Lisa for queuing me to this incredibly interesting brain structure I had known that it existed after all I teach neur Anatomy to medical students at Stanford and I taught neuron Anatomy for many many years but I don't think enough people and indeed very few professional neuroscientists could tell you what the anterior mid singulate cortex does but it has this apparently incredible function in generating tenacity and motivation along those lines one of the most incredible and important studies about the anterior mid singulate cortex and its capacity to generate feelings of tenacity and willpower comes from one of my colleagues at Stanford Joe parvy who essentially went into human beings who needed brain surgery for other reasons and stimulated particular brain areas with a very high degree of precision the title of the paper that I'm referring to was published in 2013 in the journal neuron cell Press Journal excellent journal and it's entitled the will to persevere induced by electrical stimulation of the human singulate gyrus now you'll notice the title said human singulate gyrus not anterior mid singulate gyrus but because they had electrodes and a stimulation technique that would allow them to stimulate in very small regions extending as little as 5 mm but no more away from the stimulation site they were able to march their stimulation around different sub regions of the singulate gyus of humans while those people were awake and then asked those people how do you feel what are you experiencing In This Moment In addition to that they were recording various autonomic parameters from those people so heart rate breathing in addition to brain wave activity so what the subjects report when their anterior mid singulate cortex was stimulated is that in their words something was about to happen they felt as if there was some sort of pressure upon them from the outside not physical pressure but that something was about to happen in fact one of the subjects described the sensation as it's as if there's a storm off in the distance but I know I need to go into the storm and I know I can make it through the storm okay another subject described the experience of having their anterior mid singulate cortex stimulated as okay something not necessarily good as going to happen but I know that I need to Marshall resources and resist and I'm confident that I can push through now because Parisian colleagues are excellent scientists they of course did control experiments where they would tell the person okay we're stimulating that same brain area that a moment ago you told me created this feeling of some pressure upon you that you have to resist some sense of fight or urgency to push back but in reality During certain control conditions they were not stimulating those brain areas and the sub objects then reported I don't feel like anything's about to happen yeah I don't feel anything at all in other words it was the stimulation of the anterior mid singulate cortex and only the anterior mid singulate cortex that created the sensation within people that there was something to resist that there was something putting pressure on them again not physical pressure but psychological pressure and that they were going to have to Marshall resources in order to push back upon in fact they reported feeling as if their body was getting ready to do something one subject said something along the lines of yeah I feel like I'm about to do something I'm about to go someplace or do something to resist this foreoing sense that's now coming over me so this is very interesting and of course is in line with all of the data that we discussed before about neural activity patterns both spontaneous and evoked about brain volume changes in the anterior mid singulate cortex so on and so forth and it really points to the idea that the anterior mid singulate cortex is a hub a hub Hub that receives information from A diversity of brain areas that we talked about a few minutes ago and that generates a particular sense within us that we are going to be forward Center of mass that we are going to resist something and that perhaps we are going to move or act in some particular way or as we've been discussing all along resist action in some particular way but that it requires that we Marshall resources which takes us back of course to the studies of bow meister and indeed of dck where they explored willpower as a limited resource perhaps glucose perhaps as that limited resource beliefs about willpower and glucose probably with a high degree of certainty are going to be involved there too but regardless of that controversy it's clear that there's an energy required there's an activation state of Engagement or resistance to a particular Behavior or thought pattern that we all associate with this phenomenon of tenacity and willpower and in a kind of miraculous way you know as a neuroscientist we're generally taught nowadays that individual brain areas don't really trigger individual functions and perceptions of the brain there are a few exceptions to that you know you have a fusiform face area that really does seem to be involved in the perception of faces and when lesion you can't recognize faces but outside of just a few limited contexts it's very rare that one comes across a literature that across all of the studies involved point to a single brain structure and its networks as giving rise to something as complex and flexible as tenacity and willpower but in the case of the anterior mid singulate cortex it really does seem to meet those criteria as the brain Hub responsible for tenasity and willpower now a key idea that Dr Feldman Barrett has contributed to studies of the an mid singulate cortex as a structure that helps us generate what we call tenacity and willpower to help us achieve different types of goals is this idea of allostasis most of you have perhaps heard of homeostasis which is the idea that all of our cells all of our organs indeed our entire body and psychology are always seeking homeostasis the perfect balance of sleep and activity of food and burning fuels of oxygen and carbon dioxide and so on and so forth and while homeostasis certainly exists and is a valid phenomenon there's also a concept that we hear far less about but that is equally important which is the concept of allostasis allostasis is the idea that much of what our brain and body need to do but especially our brain is to allocate right allostasis to allocate resources to particular functions depending on our motivational goals and the challenges upon us and in every way what we understand about the structure and function of the anterior mid singulate cortex is that it is doing just that it is deciding how much glucose should a given brain area consume perhaps a brain area that's involved in visual perception because you're involved in a motivational task where in order to succeed you need to pay careful visual attention to particular things or you're involved in a task where you have to listen to particular things or perhaps you are involved in a physical foot race where you don't want to allocate a lot of energy towards thinking about your stride or your step unless that's necessary and you actually want to shut down your brain activity as much as possible except for the brain areas that are required to get you to continue run in that sense the interior mid singulate cortex as a sort of a dial on how much fuel is consumed not by the brain and body as a whole but by individual brain and body parts meets all the criteria of what you would want for a brain area that controls things like tenacity and willpower because even for those individuals who seem to just have an endless supply of tenacity and willpower they too have to go into habitual Behavior they can't simply lean into every aspect of life with the kind of resistance from outside and the resistance against those outside forces or even resistance to internal forces voices in their head Etc on a constant basis they still need to sleep they still need to be functional in that expression of tenacity and willpower they need to be able to strategy switch and they need to be able to come off the gas as we say not because tenacity and willpower are necessarily a limited resource but because for so many aspects of Life engaging tenacity and willpower is not advantageous hence the example I gave earlier about eating disorders where an apparently hardwired function of our brain to be able to generate some sort of reward for resisting a given Behavior goes too far and then can actually threaten one's own health or even life so the concept of allostatic load allostatic balance and alistic function is something that we get into in a fair amount of detail in the discussion with Dr Feldman Barrett in that episode which is coming out soon but in the meantime if you are to think about the anterior mid singulate cortex as having a single function the function that Dr Feldman Barrett has ascribed to it as controlling how much energy different brain and body areas should get in a given context well that makes a lot of sense to me and I think it's the one that best describes all of the functional data indeed includes or jibes with all the anatomical data about the anterior mid singulate cortex as well one of the really important twists in all of this is that the anterior mid singulate cortex is not just sitting there to allocate and Dole out different amounts of energy and activation to different brain areas it is also receiving input from both the brain and body and in sort of a beautiful Twist on the whole story of what the anterior mid singulate cortex does we know that when we move our body we are activating the anterior mid singulate cortex and we know that when we move our body because we in some way forced ourselves or encouraged ourselves to do it we activate the anterior mid singulate cortex more similarly and because the Anor mid singulate cortex is so flexible in the different context in which it can be activated if we are simply reading or we are listening to something that we're supposed to learn or trying to learn a piece of music or trying to do anything for that matter the anterior mid singulate cortex yes will be activated but that its levels of activation are far greater when we experience a lot of resistance that we have to overcome remember the earlier result and by the way I'll provide a link in the show note captions to this particular study or set of studies there are about two one really spectacular one and a couple of others that um tangentially point to the same finding that when people engage in a hard task not an easy task but a hard task that the anterior mid singulate cortex activity is elevated so the way to think about the anterior mid singul cortex is that it's not just sitting there as a hub that you have to reach into and activate it's also receiving inputs that can activate it and that's what allows us to now talk about the tools and protocols that don't just allow us to engage our anterior mid singulate cortex and access more tenacity and willpower but that allow us to exercise not in necessarily in the context of physical exercise although it could be that too but to exercise our anterior mid singulate cortices ability to engage not just in that challenging context but in other challenging contexts as well in fact I'll just tell you right now that studies in non-human primates and to a limited extent in humans but here we think there's a strong analog between the non-human primate data and the human data the anterior mid singulate cortex is choa block full of the expression of molecules such as cyas 2 receptors to various neurotropins particular types of nmda and methylaspartate receptors all of which if none of those names mean anything to you just know that all of them refer to different aspects of and a capacity for synaptic plasticity which is the ability for Connections in the brain to change they can get stronger you can actually grow new Connections in other words the anterior mid singulate cortex can be built up as a structure to engage tenacity and willpower by activating it through one or a limited number of different types of behaviors meaning engagement in behaviors that frankly we would rather not engage in as as well as not engaging in behaviors that reflexively we really want to that we're sort of drawn to engage in both of those contexts the I absolutely will even though frankly I don't want to or you're telling me I can't as well as that I absolutely won't even though you're tempting me to do that or that's tempting me to do that or even I'm tempted to do that that buildup of the anterior mid singulate cortex has extensive carryover into other domains of life because it's the same structure that is then used for other types of behaviors and learning that require tenacity and willpower so that's incredibly reassuring in fact it's downright exciting because as I mentioned earlier while there are a near infinite number of different circumstances where we each and all need tenacity and willpower it seems that there's a very generic mechanism for generating tenacity and willpower and that means that if we can build up our capacity for tenacity and willpower by engaging particular types of behaviors and resisting particular types of behaviors will then it's going to carry over in a very functional way to the other aspects of life that we find challenging and that we may find challenging in the future okay so by now I like to think that I've convinced you because frankly the data are very convincing that the anterior mid singulate cortex is a vital Hub within your brain for allocating energy and resources to generating tenacity and willpower and perhaps it's taking you a lot of tenacity and willpower to get this far through the episode waiting with baited breath presumably to to learn how exactly you can improve the functioning of your anterior mid singulate cortex now fortunately there are published peer- rreview data that explain how to do that in fact there's a study that was published in 2006 by colum and colleagues entitled aerobic exercise training increases brain volume in aging humans and before you go runoff literally and engage in cardiovascular exercise I'm just going to describe to you the Contour of this study and what specifically was done so that you can best implement the best protocols for your particular circumstances this was a study exploring why and how certain brain areas and brain volume generally decreases as we age it's well known as I mentioned earlier that individuals aged really 50 and older and maybe even as early as 30 and older experience a decrease in brain volume with particular brain areas shrinking faster than others but of course there are other people that include include the superagers that we talked about earlier and many many other people who are not superagers who don't experience the same decrease in brain volume so why is it that they maintain the same brain size that they did when they were younger or undergo less decrease in brain size that's what the researchers for this study were initially interested in understanding and they did come to some really interesting conclusions about that but they also came to some interesting conclusions that relate to today's discussion on tenacity and willpower this study involved having individ ual who were 60 to 79 years old divided into one of two groups one group did cardiovascular exercise the other group did more calisthenics SL stretching type exercise both groups did one hour of exercise three times per week the group that did cardiovascular training initially started off by doing and by the way they just simply called it aerobic training but this could be rowing on the rower this could be running this could be cycling I think for sake of understanding application of tools and protocols you would want to pick any kind of activity that you could do consistently without injuring yourself that's what's really important and that gets your heart rate elevated they started off these individuals with relatively low intensity cardiovascular exercise for that hour getting their heart rate up to about 50% of their maximum heart rate but very quickly had those individuals increase the intensity of those cardiovascular training sessions so they were doing again three 1 hour sessions per week getting their heart rate up to about 75% of their maximum heart rate sometimes a little less 60% sometimes a little bit more but in that General range so for those of you that think about different zones of cardio this is probably in the area of zone three not quite Zone 2 cardio maybe zone three cardio so where one can not carry out a conversation very easily but where one is not completely gasping for air as one would if they went to their maximum heart rate or near maximum heart rate okay so three 1hour episodes of cardiovascular training per week at a moderately high intensity the other group simply doing calisthenics and stretching for the equivalent amount of time and they had another group within the study that were much younger that did similar activities or no activity simply as a control for the brain Imaging data now I'm summarizing the study with a fairly broad brush both for sake of time and of course I'll provide a link to the study in the show note caption so you can access it and impres in more detail if you like but I wouldn't be talking about this study if it were simply a study about cardiovascular training and brain volume I'm talking about this study because the specific brain areas that maintained or in some cases increased in volume as a consequence of doing these three hours per week of moderate intensity cardiovascular training included of course the anterior mid singulate cortex that was actually the primary location in which the maintenance of brain brain volume was observed and in some cases increases in brain volume were observed right this is a group of people who normally would be losing volume size of their anterior mid singulate cortex but for which 3 hours a week of moderate intensity cardiovascular training maintained the volume the size of that anterior mid singulate cortex and in some cases increased the volume the size of anterior mid singulate cortex and they also observed a maintenance or increase in the size of the anterior white m matter tracks remember t r a c TS I didn't spell that out before just to spell it out for fun although that is the sort of thing that I would probably do those white matter tracks are the communication routes by which different brain areas communicate and this anterior white matter tract that maintained size in the people that did cardiovascular training as compared to those that simply did the calisthenics training and stretching is the very white matter tracks that connects the two sides of the brain the frontal l that allows the anterior mid singulate cortex on one side of the brain and the anterior mid singulate cortex on the other side of the brain as well as other brain structures to communicate with one another so this is really spectacular I mean the authors of the study didn't embark on the study to find or even look for increases or maintenance in the volume of the anterior mid singulate cortex and the communication routes in and out of the anterior M singulate cortex it just so happened that cardiovascular training done three times per week for an hour at a time at modern intensity increased the size of the anterior mid singulate cortex and as I mentioned the white matter tracks which allow information to go in and out of the an mid singulate cortex now we should all be asking ourselves why would that be the case I mean somebody gets on a stationary bike and pedals or goes out on a road bike or runs is there something inherent to running or cycling or rowing or swimming or an aerobics class dancing Etc that gets the heart rate up that directly feeds into the ENT mid singulate cortex after all is the anter mid singul cortex responsible for generating the activity of running or cycling or swimming no rather the interpretation is that in order to engage in this one hour three times per week set of sessions of cardiovascular training they had to allocate resources they had to get up out of a chair they had to get off the couch they had to say no to other potential obligations social engagements meals Etc and get to these exercise classes or sessions that they did with others or alone now an interesting and in fact important aspect of the study is that the compliance with this three hours per week of cardiovascular training was very high 85% of individuals engaged in these sessions across the six-month period of the study I should have mentioned that earlier the study was carried out over the course of six months they did not have the opportunity to do neuroimaging after say a week or two weeks so they image these people's brains before and they image these people's brains after this six-month period it's anybody's guess as to whether or not they would have observed the same or maybe even greater increases at the one month interval Etc we simply don't know there's a great cost both energetic and financial to doing these kinds of studies so they looked at a six-month period but setting all of that aside this is a very important study in the context of today's discussion because what it means is that if we acknowledge that the anterior mid singulate cortex and the volume of an mid singulate cortex is related to one's ability to generate tenacity and will power for any number of different Endeavors well then having access to a tool or a protocol that can increase the size of one's anterior mid singulate cortex is going to be extremely valuable so what's the takeaway from this study the takeaway from the study is not necessarily that you should be doing three one-hour bouts of cardiovascular training per week for six months to maintain or increase the size of your anterior mid singulate cortex I do think that's the case if you're not already doing sufficient amounts of cardiovascular training and what constitutes sufficient amounts well I think there's General agreement now both between the material that I've covered in our foundational Fitness protocol and in the series on exercise physiology with Dr Andy Galpin and in various discussions with Dr Peter AA the general agreement is that everyone should be getting somewhere between 150 to 200 minutes of so-called Zone 2 low intensity cardiovascular exercise per week but the results of this study really point to the idea that we should all be doing perhaps hours but certainly we should all be doing some form of physical exercise but for any of us that are interested in increasing tenacity and willpower across domains both for cognitive and physical Endeavors emotional Endeavors too for that matter that we should be engaging in some exercise and again we're going to talk about cognitive exercise in a moment but that we should be engaging in some exercise that we are not already doing now that of course will lead many people to think wait I'm already doing two 100 minutes per week of Zone 2 cardio how can I add 3 hours more of cardio that's not what I'm saying what's important to understand about this whole discussion about tenacity and willpower is that the ability to engage the anterior mid singulate cortex and to build up its volume literally and increase its activity relies on one critical feature which is that you have to be in some degree of resistance some lack of Desire or I should say lack of reflexive desire or ability to engage in that behavior okay this is super important if you're thinking about tools and protocols to increase your level of tenacity and willpower if for instance you love cold showers and Ice baths well then it's very unlikely that taking cold showers or getting into an ice bath is going to increase your level of tenacity and willpower further it might reinforce the tenacity and willpower that you've already built but it's not going to increase it further you need to add something or subtract something that makes it harder not easier to engage in or resist a behavior okay I want to be really clear about this in the study that I just described from col and colleagues they took individuals that were not exercising prior to the study and those people had to therefore generate significant amounts of motivation in order to regularly engage in these three one hour per week episodes of cardiovascular training okay now the fact that there was no comparable increase in the volume of the anterior mid singulate cortex or anterior white matter tracks in the group that did the calisthenics and stretching is also important because it implies that activities that are easier to carry out that don't get the heart rate elevated as much are not going to create changes in this brain structure that is associated with tenacity and willpower and there's a nice confirmation of that in the study in fact because they observed as one would expect a significant increase in V2 Max in the individuals that were assigned to the group that did cardiovascular training but they did not observe a significant increase in V2 Max in the individuals that did three 1 hour per week sessions of calisthetics and stretching across the six-month period okay so the important Point here is if you're already doing let's say an hour a week of moderate to high-intensity cardiovascular training or resistance training for that matter you're going to need to add something in order to get further activation of this brain hub for tenacity and willpower and of course the idea here or else we wouldn't be talking about it is that that activation and that increase in volume in the an mid singulate cortex would then be applicable to other endeavors for instance academics or some aspect of your professional life or relationship life that you can build up tenacity and willpower as a capacity within you or we should say within your anterior mid singulate cortices but that the route to activating and increasing the robustness of your anterior mid singulate cortex requires that you engage in something that you don't really want to do and certainly not something that you're regularly engaging in already remember way back at the beginning of today's episode we compared willpower and tenacity to Habit execution right well this is a simple case where if you're already doing something simply continuing to do it might maintain what you've already got but it's not going to further build up your tenacity and willpower so along those lines I don't want you to Simply take the three 1hour cardiovascular sessions per week protocol that they use within the study and expect it to increase your levels of tenacity and willpower unless of course your Curr only doing 1 hour of cardiovascular training at moderate to high intensity per week in which case increasing to two hours may very well increase your interior mid singlet cortex and overall level of tenacity and willpower and certainly doing three hours per week would be expected to do it even further and I should mention that we can extrapolate from this study in a meaningful way I think in a grounded way that's related to mechanism and say well if you for instance like me can't play a musical instrument or are not bilingual in language that taking on the challenge if indeed it's a challenge and for me it would be a challenge perhaps for you as well to learn an instrument as an adult or to learn a second or maybe a third language if that's challenging and in fact that's something that you're resisting doing well then great it's going to provide an even greater opportunity to engage the activity of the anterior mid singulate cortex remember that study that showed that hard tasks hard challenges are what activate the entor mid singulate cortex easy challenges don't okay habits that are reflexive simply do not so you have to pick something hard you have to pick something that's either physically and or psychologically hard and of course we want to highlight the fact that you never want to engage in anything physical or cognitive emotional or otherwise that is psychologically or physically damaging to you right because this is something that you're going to want to maintain or carry out for some period of time now alone those lines we could imagine a huge number of different protocols that one could engage in but I think there are a couple of key things that extend across all of those opportunities first of all it's clear now based on our understanding of the anatomical inputs to the anterior mid singulate cortex that while exercise is great and certainly movement of the body when we don't want to move our body AKA running AKA weightlifting AKA learning a new skill like dancing or gymnastics or something of that sort is going to engage this hub for tenacity and willpower the an mid singulate cortex but there are a number of other opportunities to do that and we can think of those in a kind of playful context but one that is both playful and highly functional and applicable so for instance if you already resistance train and you're doing what we now generally agree as a field is the minimum of six hard working sets per muscle group per week in order to maintain or build muscle size and strength some of you don't want to build muscle size but everyone should be trying to maintain muscle strength there's a very high correlation we now know between muscle strength and cognitive function especially as one gets past 40 years of age but even younger so maintaining neuromuscular function and strength is very very important even if you don't want to increased muscle size you can learn how to do that by the way we have zeroc cost protocols they're all listed out by going to hubin lab.com check out the series I did with Dr Andy Galpin check out the key toolkit takeaways from that series also available at hubn lab.com just put exerc protocols into the search function but let's say you're already resistance training you're already doing cardiovascular training what can you do to build up your tenacity and willpower for application in not just that endeavor but other endeavors well pick something that you don't want to do these are what I call in a very non-scientific way micro sucks these things suck but they suck a little bit and they're safe right you have to pick things that are safe for you but they suck enough that they require some effort they require getting over some friction engaging in something that you don't reflexively want to do so for instance that might be one extra set at the end of a round of three to five sets of a given exercise or it could be for instance 100 jumping jacks at the end of what you consider a hard run it could be for instance finishing out that language lesson and then deciding to do five minutes of sitting still thinking about the material that you learned when you so desperately want to just jump on your phone right pick circumstances where the degree of resistance is very high where the degree of impulse to do something else than the thing that you know you need to do is very high and then start applying those on a regular basis it could be after every workout it could be in the middle of the workout for instance some people have a really hard time not looking at their phone during a workout I like to listen to podcasts or music during a workout but I really try and resist text messaging and reading email and things of that sort while working out so the harder that becomes the more I think about it and the more I resist it the more presumably activation of the anid singulate cortex I'm getting and that you would get as well so these little micro sucks like ah it sucks not to look at the phone right now it sucks to do 100 jumping jacks at the end of a run of course if you're excited to to the 100 jumping jacks at the end of The Run that's not going to be a good Avenue into activating and increasing the volume of your anterior mid singulate cortex everything we've talked about up until now supports the statement I just made easy tasks desirable tasks don't do it it's the thing you don't want to do so imparting these little micro sucks can be very useful you'll have to think about what particular micro sucks you incorporate into your exercise routines your cognitive routines and your daily routines and how often I don't think you need to go completely berserk on this doing them all day long but keep in mind that these are the sorts of behaviors and resistance of behaviors because again certain micro sucks might be you know if you're somebody who practices intermittent fasting you know we don't want to send you into the realm of eating disorder but you know maybe you really do wait an extra 15 minutes before your usual first meal time which for me would really suck that might even move from micro suck into macro suck because I like to eat when I'm hungry but waiting a few extra minutes for no other reason than allowing oneself to activate that anterior mid singulate cortex circuitry would be one way to try and build up one's tenacity and willpower so at some level they should all seem pretty logical it actually doesn't even require a firm understanding of the L Neuroscience for it to of make sense right you want to do something you resist doing it that's building up tenacity and willpower you don't really want to do something you do it that's building up tenacity and willpower well I do believe in fact there a lot of data to support the fact that our understanding of the mechanisms underneath things like tenacity and willpower can be very advantageous when trying to carry out these different types of behaviors to increase tenacity and willpower why well today we learned that that there's a huge variety of contexts in which one can activate the ENT mid singulate cortex which means that it's not cardiovascular exercise per se it's not resisting the cookie per se right it's not waiting 15 more minutes to eat or making sure that you sit still and don't look at your phone at the end of a learning bout and really think about what you learned a little bit more even though it really really sucks to do that it's really hard it creates a lot of agitation it's not about any one of those protocols if you will per se rather it's about deliberate engagement in the behaviors that we least want to do in a given moment or if you're trying to build up willpower and tenacity to not engage in certain types of behaviors it's about our ability to suppress behavioral action now I do want to highlight the potential hazards of this type of approach to building up tenacity and willpower and indeed to life and we can call on the earlier example of Eating Disorders as a very safe alient one right there is a way in which all of this can run a muck and we can get so heavily into stoicism we can get so heavily into the idea of building up tenacity and willpower that it takes us into Realms that are unhealthy for us psychologically emotionally Andor physically and that's certainly not the goal here and I certainly don't want to motivate that type of behavior or resistance of behavior we should all be seeking a relationship with life and with goals Etc that involves yes I believe some degree of activating tenacity and willpower really finding that fight within us that Parisian colleagues found when they stimulated the anterior mid singulate cortex of people right all of a sudden they're like yep I'm driving into a storm or there's something about to happen and I'm going to have to resist I'm either going to have to do something or resist doing something but there's something activated inside of me I think it's very important that we are all able to Garner those resources and to activate those States within us voluntarily but I also know from experience and from observing others and indeed from the literature on the anterior mid singulate cortex as it relates to eating disorders and other aspects of neurologic and psychiatric challenges is that we also need to learn how to turn that off with that said the little micro sucks that we discussed you know the addition of 100 jumping jacks at the end of a cardiovascular training session when you would much rather just shower up and go home getting into the cold shower or cold plunge when you absolutely don't want to do it well provided you can do it safely that's going to be the best time to do it if your goal is to build up tenacity and willpower to say nothing else of the known benefits of things like deliberate cold exposure and exercise like jumping jacks Etc there are also entire Landscapes of life and academics and sport that afford US the opportunity to build up tenacity and willpower I for instance can recall taking my so-called qualifying exams in graduate school where they ask you questions until you say I don't know until you don't know the answer it's just like that puzzle in the bow Meister study they're taking you to the point where you basically can't win and that turns out to be a very important lesson that extends beyond the information that they're asking you about and of course every student at the end of their qualifying exam runs off and figures out the answer to the question that they couldn't get the right answer to sometimes there is a right answer sometimes they not if the committee is pretty diabolical they'll give you an impossible to answer question because there's no answer but the point being that whether or not it's in martial arts whether or not it's in sports whether or not it's in music whether or not it's in academics whether or not it's in relating to others there is some value to getting to that point where you can't solve the puzzle and I think that's an important message for us to understand and maybe to incorporate into our tools and protocols that there are some Endeavors that have no end point right there's no winning there's no Finish Line and those type of Endeavors are extremely important extremely important for continually building up our tenacity and willpower so much so that we can even take a somewhat 3,000 mile view from the top down onto everything we've talked about today and think about those superagers those superagers that somehow are able to maintain the cognitive function of a much younger person and if you look at the Daton super agers and people similar to them you'll find are always engaged in some activity that's hard for them they're always trying to learn something and they have a sort of playfulness about it but they seek out those friction points both resistance of certain behaviors right trying to not do certain things but perhaps more often doing certain things learning learning a new skill learning Pottery learning music placing themselves into novel environments that are a little uncomfortable or a lot uncomfortable provided that it's safe so from that standpoint one could even entertain the idea that because these people are living much longer than everybody else in addition to maintaining the cognitive function of much younger individuals that perhaps the inter mid singulate cortex in its ability to allocate resources to different parts of our brain and body to meet C certain motivational goals is actually associated with this thing that we call the will to live now the concept of the will to live is certainly getting a little bit squishy for scientists like me who yes I'm happy to entertain discussions that relate to psychological constructs such as tenacity and willpower but as you've probably noticed I'm very comfortable with and very excited about the idea that okay maybe it's relate somehow to brain energetics and glucose maybe not certainly I'm on board the idea that belief impact our physiology and Physiology impacts our beliefs I'll Dr Ali Crum who was a guest on this podcast previously talked about belief and mindset effects which are very powerful they change our physiology literally and the D data that we talked about today but of course also that there are brain areas and circuits that underly these things that we call tenacity and willpower so when we get into a discussion about tenacity and willpower and then find ourselves as we are now talking about the will to live I don't think it's going too far to say that when one looks looks at the data on longevity both physical and psychological longevity it's very clear that there are underlying physiological explanations not the least of which is likely to be the maintenance if not growth over the lifespan of this anterior mid singulate cortex but also that the people that are achieving that are continually forging in their environment they're continually looking for new environments they're continually exploring they are not becoming complacent they are not becoming sedentary they not existing down at that end of the Continuum that we call apathy and depression but that they're not existing down there and they are existing up toward the end of the Continuum that we call tenacity and willpower and engaging motivation to get there okay motivation again as a verb but in doing that that they're reinforcing the very circuits that give rise to tenacity and willpower this is what in engineering terms is referred to as a closed loop it's like you do a which leads to B which leads to C which feeds back onto a and makes a that much more likely to occur it's like turning the little a into a capital A and then turning into a bold face Capital underline a you know the buildup of neural circuits so while today we focused a lot on an individual brain area anterior mid singulate cortex and in many ways I presented it as if it's the Beall end all of tenacity and willpower it is not the Beall end all of tenacity and willpower it's our ability to engage the anterior mid singulate cortex that allows us to express tenacity and willpower but in this closed loop fashion it's our ability to express tenacity and willpower that then feeds back onto that circuit and makes it more robust and more likely to be accessible in the future when we encounter something that we don't want to do or that we have to resist very strongly in order to not engage in some sort of behavior or thought pattern so the big takeaway is that if you want to increase your tenacity and willpower you absolutely can you can do that by triggering activation of this incred inedible Hub within the brain the anterior mid singulate cortex for which there is now a very large amount of evidence is at least Central to the whole process of generating tenacity and willpower the I absolutely will do that and the no I absolutely won't do that it's the resistance Hub it's the thing that's allocating resources to do the thing that we don't want to do or that someone's trying to prevent us from doing it's also the brain area that's allowing us to resist doing the thing that we want to do or that someone else wants to do when we decide that's not good for us we can really be certain based on the psychology literature based on the Neuroscience literature and really based on this beautiful literature that's now emerging that includes the colum study but some other studies as well that perhaps we'll talk about in a future episode that we really can build up our capacity for tenacity and willpower it's a real thing and as a final point to this and indeed as a final protocol I was very excited to look into the early release of peer-reviewed papers out from neuron just this last week and to see that there was a study albeit in a pre-clinical model in an animal model that explored what is called stress relief as a natural resilience mechanism and I won't go into the study in full detail especially not now laid into a slightly long episode such as this one but what the study showed is that when an animal is in a state of despair or aidonia lack of pleasure when it's under stress and then that stress is removed there's a sense of reward there's a sense of of well-being that accompanies that release of stress and that's pretty obvious that's something that we've known about for a very long time but what's interesting about this study and they actually talk about this in terms of its applicability potentially to humans is that when we are able to withstand a stress maybe that stresses school maybe that stresses a particular relationship again you never want to do these things in a way that's unhealthy or dangerous but when we are able to do that the relief that we feel afterwards is its own form of reward that serves to reinforce that whole process of tenacity and willpower that got us through the stressor and an interesting thing about this study is that they went on to compound that reward they showed that rewarding oneself for having gotten through a stressful episode actually serves to increase the capacity to get through stressful episodes in the future in other words if you decide to develop certain tools and protocols to increase your levels of tenacity and willpower which frankly I hope that you will at least consider again provided you do it safely this seems like a very good thing to do for all of us especially as we age and guess what we're all aging from the time we're born if you decide to do that pick something that's challenging overcome that challenge again this could be the requirement to engage in a particular behavior when you don't want to or to resist a particular behavior that you would otherwise want to engage in but also when you've successfully completed that resistance when you've engaged that tenacity and willpower and you've activated that anterior mid singulate cortex well then occasionally not always but occasionally providing yourself with a reward of something that you like and here it's highly subjective you'll just have to pick something that you like again something that's hopefully Health promoting not Health diminishing can serve to further reinforce the behavior that you just engaged in which was to increase your tenacity and willpower and if you listen to the episodes that I've done on dopamine motivation and drive or on dopamine more generally you will know that I am not a fan of rewarding oneself for wins or for engaging tenacity or willpower for that matter on a regular basis or certainly every time this is the sort of thing that just randomly every once in a while when you've done the hard thing or if you've resisted the thing that was pulling on you that you should reward yourself but of course reward yourself in healthy and safe ways for those of you that are interested in learning more about how to reward the actions of tenacity and willpower I'll provide a link to the recently published paper in neuron in the show note captions I will also be doing a toolkit episode that relates to what we covered today as well as some additional tools gleaned from other papers and resources in the not too dist future thank you for joining me for today's discussion all about tenacity and willpower we talked about the idea gleaned from research in the field of psychology that tenacity and willpower are limited resources and that perhaps again perhaps they relate to this concept of ego depletion that relates to this idea that what is depleted or what's limited in our ability to engage tenacity and willpower somehow relates to brain energetics and fuel consumption namely glucose I also talked about the conflicting data that argues that if we believe tenacity and willp power are limited and that glucose is the thing that limits them well then that's exactly what happens so I talked about that controversy and some of the data that actually reconcile a bit of the differences there so in the absence of new data you'll have to decide for yourself what you believe about tenacity and willpower however it's very important to acknowledge the universal truth which is that our tenacity and willpower rides on the tide of autonomic function that is when we are sleep deprived when we are in pain when we are in emotional pain or when we are distracted our tenacity and willpower is diminished which calls upon all of us to make sure that we're taking care of our autonomic functions through viewing morning sunlight getting sufficient sleep adequate nutrition social connections things that I've covered extensively on previous episodes then we talked about the neural underpinnings of tenacity and willpower and this absolutely incredible brain structure that we'll call a hub because it's not operating in isolation but rather it's getting inputs from lots of different brain areas related to reward executive function autonomic function motor planning goal seeking Etc that we call the anterior mid singular cortex this phenomenally interesting brain area that seems to be able to generate this thing that we call tenacity and willpower and that when we engage or Express tenacity and willpower by doing the thing that we least want to do by not doing the thing that we most want to do in a given moment that we actually can build up our anterior mid singulate cortex and thereby build up our future capacity to engage the enter mid singulate cortex when we need to call on tenacity and will power and then we talked about some of the peer- review data that shows how that actually can be done where these individuals who were not previously exercising did a challenging three 1hour sessions per week of cardiovascular training and indeed their anterior mid singulate cortex and the connections two and away from it increased in a way that set them apart from their age related cohorts that is their brains stayed younger maybe even got younger whereas those that did not do the hard thing right that didn't engage tenacity and willpower did not experience the same effect and then we talked about how those data could be extended into a number of different Realms such as cognitive learning learning languages learning math learning art learning any number of different things or in the Physical Realm engaging in certain types of exercise that one is not already engaging in adding in a little bit of additional exercise specifically at a time in which you least want to do that or extending your fasting period if that's something that you're doing and that you can do healthfully simply because it allows you to exercise your anterior mid singulate cortex AKA tenacity and willpower and of course we highlighted that all of that needs to be done in the context of psychological and physical safety we don't want anyone to do things that are going to be physically damaging to themselves but if one simply takes the stance of okay what's something that I can do in a moment that will allow me to build up tenacity and willpower well it's going to be the thing that I least want to do in that moment or the thing that I least want to resist doing in that moment to periodically add in those little what I referred to as micros sucks a very um non-scientific frankly non- psychological term but I think we all understand what it means little things that we don't want to do but that if we do them you can be sure that you are activating the interent mid singulate cortex and thereby increasing the probability the likelihood that you can access tenacity and willpower more readily in the future so what I've done today is explain the scientific studies in the realm of Psychology and Neuroscience that explain what tenacity and willpower are and what allows us to build up our tenacity and willpower over time and then it's really up to all of us to you and to me and everybody else to figure out in which particular domains and with which frequency we're going to decide to build up our tenacity and willpower so it's clear that tenacity and willpower are not just resources that we need to call upon from time to time in order to overcome things but then indeed calling on our ability and building up our ability for tenacity and willpower can allow us much richer enjoyment of life and perhaps can even extend our life by engaging the will to live thank you for joining me for today's discussion about the science of tenacity and willpower and tools and protocols to increase one's ability to access tenacity and willpower if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a five-star review if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or topics or guests that you'd like me to cover on the hubman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube I do read all the comments in addition please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast not on today's episode but on many previous episodes of The hubbin Lab podcast we discuss supplements while supplements aren't necessary for everybody many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like improving sleep for hormone support and for Focus to see this supplements discussed on the hubman Lab podcast go to live momentus spelled o us so it's Liv mous.com huberman if you're not already following me on social media you can do so by going to huberman lab on all social media platforms so that's Instagram Twitter now called X LinkedIn Facebook and threads on all of those platforms I cover science and science related tools some of which overlaps with the content of the hubman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the content covered on the hubman Lab podcast again that's hubman lab on all social media platforms if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network newsletter the neural network newsletter is a zero cost monthly newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as toolkits so toolkits for sleep toolkits for Learning and plasticity toolkits related to dopamine regulation and much more again it's all zero cost you simply go to hubman lab.com go to the menu tab scroll down to newsletter and simply enter your email and we do not share your email with anybody thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion about tenacity and willpower and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in [Music] science

========================================

--- Video 178 ---
Video ID: q8CHXefn7B4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q8CHXefn7B4
Title: Chris Voss: How to Succeed at Hard Conversations
Published: 2023-10-02 12:00:42 UTC
Description:
In this episode, my guest is Chris Voss, a former Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) agent who was the lead negotiator in many high-risk, high-consequence cases. Chris has taught negotiation courses at Harvard and Georgetown Universities and is the author of the book “Never Split the Difference.” We discuss how to navigate difficult conversations of all kinds, including in business, romance and romantic breakups, job firings and tense conversations with family and friends. Chris explains how to navigate online, in person and in written negotiations, the red flags to watch out for and how to read body and voice cues in face-to-face and phone conversations. He explains how to use empathy, certain key questions, proactive listening, emotional processing and more to ensure you reach the best possible outcome in any hard conversation. This episode ought to be of interest to anyone looking to improve their interpersonal abilities and communication skills and for those who want to be able to keep a level head in heated discussions. 

#HubermanLab #ChrisVoss

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Plunge: https://plunge.com/huberman 
ROKA: https://roka.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman 
InsideTracker Giveaway: https://info.insidetracker.com/hydrow
Momentous: https://livemomentous.com/huberman

Huberman Lab Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/newsletter

Chris Voss
The Black Swan Group: https://www.blackswanltd.com 
MasterClass: https://bit.ly/45bL86o
Never Split the Difference (book): https://amzn.to/47Ng5Qv
Fireside Chriss Voss: https://bit.ly/46rMNWc 
The Edge Newsletter: https://bit.ly/46hTj2f
Live Events: https://bit.ly/46cFDFM 
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/c/Blackswanltd1 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/christophervoss
X: https://twitter.com/fbinegotiator 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/ChrisVossNegotiation
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/thefbinegotiator

Articles
Human magnetic sense is mediated by a light and magnetic field resonance-dependent mechanism: https://go.nature.com/3PFQ5hP
Conscious processing of narrative stimuli synchronizes heart rate between individuals: https://bit.ly/48BegXl

Books
"Man Without a Gun : One Diplomat's Secret Struggle to Free the Hostages, Fight Terrorism, and End a War": https://amzn.to/3RfHTWv
"Beyond Winning: Negotiating to Create Value in Deals and Disputes": https://amzn.to/3uSBjOd
"The Upward Spiral: Using Neuroscience to Reverse the Course of Depression, One Small Change at a Time": https://amzn.to/4acfs4t
"The Full Fee Agent: How to Stack the Odds in Your Favor as a Real Estate Professional": https://amzn.to/3Nhe9Hp

Huberman Lab Episodes
Dr. Eddie Chang: The Science of Learning & Speaking Languages: https://bit.ly/46rUFaZ
How Smell, Taste & Pheromone-Like Chemicals Control You: https://bit.ly/45u3ik1
Dr. Robert Malenka: How Your Brain's Reward Circuits Drive Your Choices: https://bit.ly/459vqbH
Dr. Paul Conti: Therapy, Treating Trauma & Other Life Challenges: https://bit.ly/45g8Nmb

Timestamps
00:00:00 Chris Voss
00:02:18 Sponsors: Plunge & ROKA
00:04:59 Negotiation Mindset, Playfulness
00:11:41 Calm Voice, Emotional Shift, Music
00:18:59 “Win-Win”?, Benevolent Negotiations, Hypothesis Testing
00:28:38 Generosity
00:32:46 Sponsor: AG1
00:33:44 Hostile Negotiations, Internal Collaboration
00:39:40 Patterns & Specificity; Internet Scams, “Double-Dip”
00:48:15 Urgency, Cons, Asking Questions
00:54:46 Negotiations, Fair Questions, Exhausting Adversaries
01:01:09 Sponsor: InsideTracker
01:02:18 “Vision Drives Decision”, Human Nature & Investigation
01:07:47 Lying & Body, “Gut Sense”
01:15:42 Face-to-Face Negotiation, “738” & Affective Cues 
01:20:39 Online/Text Communication; “Straight Shooters”
01:26:47 Break-ups (Romantic & Professional), Firing, Resilience
01:32:16 Ego Depletion, Negotiation Outcomes
01:37:35 Readiness & “Small Space Practice”, Labeling
01:45:17 Venting, Emotions & Listening; Meditation & Spirituality
01:51:41 Physical Fitness, Self-Care
01:57:01 Long Negotiations & Recharging
02:02:40 Hostages, Humanization & Names
02:08:50 Tactical Empathy, Compassion
02:15:27 Tool: Mirroring Technique
02:22:20 Tool: Proactive Listening
02:29:48 Family Members & Negotiations
02:35:21 Self Restoration, Humor 
02:39:01 Fireside, Communication Courses; Rapport; Writing Projects
02:47:45 “Sounds Like…” Perspective
02:50:54 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, YouTube Feedback, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://www.hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 179 ---
Video ID: 7Ey_vTTgJGc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Ey_vTTgJGc
Title: AMA #11: Improve Task Switching & Productivity and Reduce Brain Fog
Published: 2023-09-29 12:00:04 UTC
Description:
Welcome to a preview of the 11th Ask Me Anything (AMA) episode, part of Huberman Lab Premium.

The Huberman Lab Premium subscription was launched for two main reasons. First, it was launched in order to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast channel — which will continue to come out every Monday at zero-cost. Second, it was launched as a means to raise funds for important scientific research. A significant portion of proceeds from the Huberman Lab Premium subscription will fund human research (not animal models) selected by Dr. Huberman, with a dollar-for-dollar match from the Tiny Foundation.

Subscribe to Huberman Lab Premium at https://www.hubermanlab.com/premium

#HubermanLab #Science #AMA

Timestamps
00:00:00 Introduction
00:01:46 Is There a Way to Get Better at Task Switching?
00:32:17 Huberman Lab Premium

In the full AMA episode, we discuss:
- What Can I Do in Order to Avoid Getting Brain Fog?

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

The Huberman Lab podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Transcript Language: English
ANDREW HUBERMAN: Welcome to the Huberman Lab podcast, where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life. [MUSIC PLAYING] I'm Andrew Huberman. I'm a Professor of Neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today is an Ask Me Anything episode, or AMA. This is part of our premium subscriber channel. Our premium subscriber channel was started in order to provide support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast, which comes out every Monday and is available at zero cost to everybody on all standard feeds-- YouTube, Apple, Spotify and elsewhere. We also started the premium channel as a way to generate support for exciting research being done at Stanford and elsewhere, research on human beings that leads to important discoveries that assist mental health, physical health, and performance. I'm also pleased to inform you that for every dollar the Huberman Lab Premium channel generates for research studies, the Tiny Foundation has agreed to match that amount. Now, we are able to double the total amount of funding given to studies of mental health, physical health, and human performance. If you'd like to subscribe to the Huberman Lab podcast Premium channel, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium. It is $10 a month to subscribe, or you can pay $100 all at once to get an entire 12-month subscription for a year. We also have a lifetime subscription model that is a one-time payment. Again, you can find that option at hubermanlab.com/premium. For those of you that are already subscribers to the premium channel, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium and download the premium subscription feed. For those of you that are not Huberman Lab podcast Premium subscribers, you can still hear the first 20 minutes of today's episode and determine whether or not becoming a premium subscriber is for you. Without further ado, let's get to answering your questions. The first question is about task switching. The specific question is, is there a way to get better at task switching? Task switching is an incredibly interesting topic. It's something that plagues many people. That is, a lot of people have challenges with task switching. It's also a topic that people will often confuse with cognitive flexibility. All of us, unless it's been removed, have an area of our brain called the prefrontal cortex. The words prefrontal cortex actually refers to a fairly varied real estate within the human brain. It's not one area of the human brain. Prefrontal cortex actually includes a lot of different subdivisions that do different things in the context of cognition and directing action, withholding action, these kinds of things. One of the main functions of the prefrontal cortex is that when it's working well, it allows us to direct our focus and our cognition, our thinking, in a context-dependent way. One of the simplest ways to describe this is that when you took math in high school or if you're still taking math, your brain had to carry out certain types of cognitive operations that were very different than the types of cognitive operations that you need to carry out in your history class or your social studies class. There were some features of all three of those classes that were the same, in the sense that presumably, you had to sit in a chair for all of those classes. You followed a certain set of rules that pertained to all three of those different classes, even though there are different subjects. But then, there were certain rules that pertained just to mathematics, certain rules that you followed because a particular teacher was strict-- not because of the topic they were covering-- as well as certain rules that maybe you did not pay attention to because a different teacher was a little more lax. For instance, maybe there was a teacher that let you put your feet up on the chair in front of you. Maybe, another teacher forbid that at all costs. The point being that your prefrontal cortex is the area of your brain that, along with other areas of your brain, ensures that you engage in context-specific behavior, context-specific thinking and context-specific understanding about what you should and should not do. Now, cognitive flexibility is similar, in the sense that it describes your ability to switch the types of cognitive operations-- as the name suggests-- depending on what sorts of things you're trying to learn or understand. It's a lot more extensive than that. In fact, we will probably do an entire episode all about both cognitive flexibility and perhaps, even a separate episode on task switching. Task switching is somewhat distinct from cognitive flexibility. First of all task, switching requires cognitive flexibility, but they are not the same thing. Now, when we talk about task switching-- or rather, when you see task switching in the scientific literature-- most often, it has to do with people performing one particular type of mental or physical operation. Say, they're maneuvering things with their hands or other parts of their body, or they are required to carry out one specific type of mental process. And then, they are required, either at random intervals or at specific intervals-- maybe every 10 minutes or so-- to switch their attention and to do a different task entirely. In the laboratory experiment situation, this has most typically been carried out the following way. People are going to do one cognitive task, maybe mathematics, or they're going to count, for instance, from 1 up to infinity, as high as they can go in a given amount of time, in increments of say, 7 or increments of 7 plus 1 then 7 minus 1. These can be made increasingly difficult. You get the idea. And then perhaps, a tone is played or they'll get a signal from the experimenter. They need to switch their task to doing something quite different, but also cognitive. That's the most typical arrangement. Another typical arrangement in a task switching experiment is that the person in the task switching experiment will be asked to do some sort of physical manipulation of objects, maybe placement of puzzle pieces into the correct configuration. Then at some designated interval or intervals, they will have to switch to a different manual task. Fewer-- not zero, but fewer-- experiments have examined task switching between physical and cognitive tasks. There are these kind of outrageous examples that you can find on the internet. By the way, I don't suggest that anyone go engage in these examples in real life of extreme task switching. One of the most notable ones would be chess boxing. Believe it or not, this exists, where two people will enter a ring. They will sit down at a table. They will play chess for a given period of time. They're entirely focused on playing chess. Then a buzzer will go off. The chess table will be cleared. The chairs will be cleared. They will be expected to box, literally fight, for a round of a minute to three minutes, and then, go back to chess, then to boxing, so-called chess boxing. Again, I'm not suggesting people chess box. But I know that many people have challenges with task switching. Here, I can raise my hand and say that I am one such person. I've always had a pretty good ability to drop into deep focus after a period of time. I, like everybody else, take a little bit of time to get into a book chapter or to get into a mode of physical exercise. But once I'm doing something, I tend to be very focused on that. I have a much greater challenge in switching out of that focused mode to doing the next thing, which is one of the reasons why oftentimes, I run tardy, because I'm still mentally thinking about or physically engaged in the thing that I was doing before. This is something I'm constantly working on. As a consequence, I've had to seek out and implement certain tools to improve my ability to task switch. I'm going to share a few of those tools with you now, because I know a number of people probably struggle with the same thing. As I mentioned earlier, I'm also going to do a full-length episode about task switching, both the underlying mechanisms of task switching as well as a more extensive list of tools related to task switching, as a full-length Huberman Lab podcast episode. How can we get better at task switching? Short of having somebody scruff you by the neck and force you to stop whatever activity you're doing and engage in the next activity that you're doing, one of the best things that we can do to support our ability to task switch-- that's nicely supported both at the mechanistic level and at the practical level within the published literature-- is to introduce short transition gaps between the activities that we're trying to switch between. This is something that, in my opinion, has not been discussed enough. In fact, when was the last time you heard about the requirement for introducing gaps between tasks if you want to switch between them more efficiently? And yet, as a consequence of this not being discussed very often, I think a lot of people have placed an undue burden on themselves. For instance, a lot of people think that when you sit down with a book and you're going to read, that you should be able to immediately focus on the material that you're reading and not have your mind flitting about. During the first five, maybe even 10 minutes of reading a book chapter, unless you are absolutely enthralled from the first word, or you are intensely curious what the material in that book chapter is-- maybe that book chapter is about you and what's going to happen to you next in your life. Maybe the news article is about something that you care oh so much about. But unless it's one of those specific instances, it's going to be about five or 10 minutes before the neural circuits in your brain that are required to understand and digest and commit that material to memory are going to come online at the levels of activity that are going to be required for you to experience that as intense focus, or even as mild focus. The activity of the brain is always going to be in a push-pull. This is extremely important for understanding task switching. When you go from one task-- and maybe the task was simply to walk over to where the book is located-- to focusing on the material within that book, you have to both engage activity within certain neural circuits and you need to disengage the activity of other neural circuits. Sometimes, this is referred to as inhibition of certain neural circuits. Other times, it's just going to be a dissipation of activity of those neural circuits. They're just going to quiet down, like a dimming of the lights in a particular room, while the activity of other neural circuits increases. The first thing that you really need to understand, if you want to get better at task switching, is that you cannot and you should not expect yourself to immediately drop into a narrow trench of focus, or a narrow trench of ability, for anything that you're not already extremely skilled at or extremely interested in knowing. One of the reasons why this is often overlooked is that, for instance, if we receive a text message from somebody and we are very interested in what's contained in that text message, maybe even eagerly anticipating the dot, dot, dot in that little window where the text message is going to arrive-- like here it comes. Here it comes. Here it comes. It's an example of where you are able to immediately pay attention and absorb information. For instance, if you're trying to meet somebody in a big city, and you need to know exactly where to meet them, and you've arrived at the place where you thought you need to be and then, you can't find them. You're waiting. Where are you? Where are you? You're going to commit that information to memory and you're going to act on it. But when you sit down to read a book of unknown content, or where you have just a general sense of what the content is, or when you sit down to do something like work on a spreadsheet or your taxes, or engage in a conversation with somebody, expect a five to 10 minute transition period. I can't emphasize this enough, because I think a lot of people mistakenly think that they have issues with attention. Perhaps indeed, they have clinically diagnosable attention deficit hyperactivity disorder or some other form of attention deficit disorder. I certainly can't rule that out based on this conversation alone. But a lot of people place this unfair burden on themselves to immediately be able to focus on a given task. This is also true for physical tasks. If you go to the gym to work out or you're heading out on a run or a cycling expedition, the idea that you would immediately be able to cycle at your peak performance, or that you could perform sets and reps in the gym as best as you possibly could without any warm-up, without any transition period, that you could forget about the difficult or maybe even great conversation that you were having on the way in, or that you could forget about other activities that you need to do in the rest of your day, that's just completely unfair. It doesn't match at all the way that your neural circuits work. You really need to match your expectation of your ability to focus on and perform a given task, whether or not it's cognitive or physical, to the actual underlying biology. That's the first point. The second point is that we know that if you want to switch from one task to another task, that you are making it more difficult to drop into full-task engagement-- or rather, engagement with task B following task A, if you try and go immediately from task A to task B-- that even the introduction-- I find this so cool-- even the introduction of an arbitrary but very short transition period of say, 15 seconds, where you know that you're introducing 15 seconds of transition and you designate it as transition, will allow you to engage in a more efficient and more complete level of task execution on task B if you introduce even a brief transition period. This I find fascinating, because what this means is that there are top down influences. There are literally things that we can tell ourselves, based on an understanding of the underlying mechanisms, that allow us to task switch better. This certainly doesn't involve taking any kind of prescription drug or supplement or doing anything differently, except as you go from task A to task B, knowing and designating that a transition period, even a very brief one where you are not trying to perform task B and that you've designated this as a transition period. I'm not trying to focus on the next thing that I need to do. I might focus on it inadvertently, but I'm not deliberately trying to focus on it. Rather, I'm going to think about what I just did and the fact that I'm no longer doing that, kind of leaving it like a fog behind. You're trying to move from this deep trench of attention, hopefully on task A-- or maybe, you didn't achieve a deep trench of attention-- and you're now done with task A. You're not placing this unfair expectation on your neural circuits to just flip to task B. You're also acknowledging that task B is going to take five to 10 minutes to drop into fully. We already talked about that. But you're going to shorten that five to 10 minutes by deliberately introducing a transition period. What comes in that transition period and its duration is important. First, let's deal with the duration. How long should the transition period be? That is going to scale directly with how long you are in a deep trench of focus for task A. Let's assume task A was something that was kind of light for you. Maybe, you're just handling some email. Maybe, you're talking to a coworker. Maybe, you were at a board meeting and it was kind of light. The stuff was just OK. You're used to this stuff. This is stuff that you do all the time. Now, you're headed back to your desk or you're headed to your next class. Or perhaps, you did a workout that morning and now, you're going to head to your place of work. Or maybe, you're leaving work and you're going to engage with family. You know need to switch all these cognitive operations. You need to dump the stuff that you were just doing cognitively, and you now need to do a bunch of other things. Context is switching. Task is switching. Just ask yourself, how deeply was I entrenched in that other activity? Was my mind flitting to other things? If I was in a deep trench of attention for that given thing, then you should give yourself slightly longer for this transition period, maybe five or even 10 minutes if you have that time. Even if you give yourself as short as 60 to 90 seconds of transition and you just designate it as transition, you're going to benefit in terms of your ability to do the next task. To be very clear, if you were in kind of a light task or something that didn't have much cognitive demand, then the transition period can be fairly short. It can be just a couple of minutes. Rather, if you were in a deep trench of attention, you really engaged in that first task, I suggest giving yourself a couple of minutes or more, maybe as much as five to 10 minutes. But you might not have that much time. In which case, give yourself any kind of transition, even if it's 10 seconds. I certainly have had times in my life, in particular when I was a new assistant professor before I got tenure, where I remember sitting down to work on a grant. I'd get two lines out. Someone would knock on the door. Hey, where are the whatever, the 30 mil syringes? Where do we keep the buffers? Did we get this thing in? And then, I'd have to shift my attention and go back to writing. I'd be distracted by something else again. Which is not to say that people were distracting me unfairly. It was simply the case that, at that time, my life required being involved in a lot more things than it did as my career progressed, at least in the short term. The point being that if you are deeply engaged in an activity, give yourself a little bit longer in the transition period between them. If you are sort of superficially involved in an activity, you need less of a transition period. But you need a transition period. What should come during that transition period? The most important thing to arrive in that transition period is a relative lack of attention to anything new. This is what's so destructive about the phone. Keep in mind, I am not one of these people that thinks that smartphones are terrible. In fact, I use mine plural, very often, all day, often. Not necessarily during deep cognitive focus, but in between those bouts of focus, I have to text message people. I do work on there. I'm on social media, so certainly not demonizing the smartphone. However, if you finish a given activity-- whether or not it's cognitive or physical activity-- and you are headed to something else that requires you do a new task, and that task requires significant amounts of attention and focus, then you would do very well to allow yourself a period of anywhere from two minutes to maybe, as long as 10 minutes-- I know this is going to be very hard for people-- but two minutes to as long as 10 minutes where you are not looking at your phone. You're not texting. You're not on social media. You're not foraging for anything. In fact, you're trying to limit the total amount of information that you're bringing into your nervous system. Now, you don't have to walk around with eyes closed and try and not hear and not see. Let's be practical, folks. That's impossible to do anyway. You can't shut down your brain while awake. You can go into states of deeper relaxation. There's a non-sleep deep rest, which we'll talk about in a little bit. But you can't shut off your brain deliberately, not in any healthy way that is. But by introducing these transition zones, or transition periods as we'll call them, of two to 10 minutes between different tasks, and making sure that within those transition periods, you are not bringing in new information-- again, another context and what are you really doing? You're ensuring that you're not going from task A to task B to task C. What we're talking about here is trying to limit your task switching between task A and task B and not introducing another task in between. You might think that looking at your phone is not a task. It's so easy. It's so reflexive. But it is. It's bringing in a lot of new context, in particular pictures and movies which are tremendous stimulus for the nervous system and anchoring your attention. It's bringing in new ideas, new thoughts that no matter how hard you try, are going to intrude into your ability to perform task B. When people say, how do I get better at task switching, I immediately want to say, please don't introduce yet more tasks. Switching from one task to another is hard enough already. Don't introduce another task in between. Some of you might take this to mean that you shouldn't have a conversation with a coworker after a meeting while walking down the hall. I'm not saying that. I still encourage people to be social. I encourage people to engage in workplace environments. However, I will say, after many years of working in laboratories that at times were quite large, if you walk into the lab and there are a lot of different things going on, one of the things that you learn how to do, if you're going to get good at your craft, is to not pay attention to what's going on with everyone crowded around a computer looking at who's winning at the World Cup. I'm not trying to insult soccer players here. I enjoy soccer, both playing it and observing it. But one has to scruff themselves a little bit in trying to limit their attention to a number of different things in the environment, and really go from task A to task B in a really dedicated way. Short lists benefit certain people. I know a lot of people are list makers out there. They like to put two or three things, or maybe 20 things that they're going to accomplish each day. One of the best tools that I ever learned, both for the sake of task switching but also for sake of just getting things done on a consistent basis-- I picked up while I was a master's student at Berkeley-- a very accomplished professor at that time told me that he writes down every day three things that he's going to accomplish and only three things, never more than three. He also included other activities. In fact, he was quite active in his physical life. He rode his bike to campus. He also was a runner. He also went to the gym. He did not include those on his list of three things. He would write down no more than three critical things to do each day. He had three critical tasks. I've employed that method as well. I'll write down one, sometimes two, most often three, but if I can, just one or two tasks that I need to complete each day. Everything else is considered part of the, let's just say, automaticity function of my day, things that I already know how to do. They don't require a ton of cognitive focus. But I limit the things that require a lot of cognitive focus to three things per day. However, those three things per day can take up many, many hours each and certainly, on the whole. There are additional things that one can do to improve your ability to task switch. One of the things that I found particularly beneficial is not a meditation, but rather, is a perceptual exercise. This is a perceptual exercise that I learned about when I was a graduate student, but in a totally different context. It has to do with the way that your visual system and the parts of your brain that parse time are related to one another and influence one another. The reason this tool makes sense for improving your ability to task switch is because it turns out that where you focus your visual attention strongly influences the way that your brain parses time. I'll describe the tool first. And then, I'll get a little bit into the underlying mechanisms. Again, I'll get deep into the underlying mechanisms, as well as the tool, as well as additional tools, in a future episode about task switching on the Huberman Lab podcast. If you were to, for instance, close your eyes and not look at anything in your external environment and just concentrate, for instance, on your breathing or the feeling on the surface of your skin-- I know this is starting to sound like meditation, but trust me, it's not meditation-- your perception of time, that is, how finely you are slicing time, would be distinctly different than if you were to open your eyes and focus on a faraway location, say way off in the horizon, and not focus on your bodily sensations. Similarly, if you were to focus your attention on some intermediate location, maybe, let's say, 20 feet away and simultaneously, focus on your internal bodily sensations or the surface of your skin, your perception of time how quickly time was passing would also be different than if you closed your eyes or if you were looking at some distant location. The perceptual tool for task switching is a very simple one. It's one that frankly, I do every morning and have for many years now and at least, for me, has really enhanced my ability to task switch. That is, just take a couple of minutes. This really only takes about two or three minutes. Typically, what I will do is, I'll start by closing my eyes. I should mention, I typically do this in an environment where ideally, I can see off into the distance, perhaps from a balcony if I'm in an apartment or a house, ideally outdoors. But if I'm indoors, I'll still do this. I'll just look as far off into the distance as I can when that step is required. I start off by closing my eyes and essentially not looking at anything, but directing my brain's focus to either the surface of my body, just what it feels like, what it's in contact with or not in contact with, maybe my breathing. Then, I'll open my eyes and I will focus on some location on my body but my bodily surface, like my hand at some distance. I'll focus my attention there maybe for just five to 15 seconds. I should mention that the first station, as I call them, where my eyes were closed and I was focusing on my bodily sensations, I also just do that for about five to 15 seconds. I don't count specifically, just roughly five to 15 seconds. Second station, you're looking at the surface of your hand. If you like, you can also concentrate on your breathing. But typically, people will just focus on some specific location on their hand. Then, I'll typically lower my hand. Then, I'll look off into the distance, maybe five to 10 feet. It doesn't really matter. Focus my visual attention there. Try and hold that focus for five to 15 seconds. Then, I'll look further off in the distance, maybe, further still off into the distance. Ultimately, what I try and do is look at a location as far off into the distance as I possibly can. I'm also trying to pay attention to my breathing at the same time, just as a way of calibrating my location to the location that I'm looking at and how great that is. Then typically, I'll close my eyes and return my attention to my immediate environment and my breathing just in the location I'm in. The entire thing only takes about two minutes. Again, starting with eyes closed, focusing on self five to 15 seconds. Then, eyes open, focusing on surface of one's body, that is, focusing one's visual attention five to 15 seconds maybe 10 feet away, then maybe, 50 feet away. If you're in the metric system, meters works just as well. These distances do not have to be precise. And then, off to the horizon and then, back to one's immediate location by closing one's eyes. What is happening when one does this perceptual exercise? Again, it's a perceptual exercise. It's a visual perceptual exercise. What's happening is, you are shifting your visual focus, obviously. But you're also shifting the way in which you fine slice or thick slice time. Your ability to recognize, consciously, whether or not your thin slicing or thick slicing time is much harder to get a grasp of than it is to get a grasp of whether or not you're looking at your hand or off in the distance. That's kind of obvious. But what we know for sure is that as you shift your attention from your immediate environment out to different designated locations in your environment, and your time perception shifts accordingly, you're essentially training your brain to shift visual focus and the way in which you process in the time domain. This is important in the context of task switching, because so much of task switching is not just to understand OK, I'm going from reading to running or from running to reading and the different types of operations that are required in one case versus the other, but also, a shift in the neural circuits that underlie your perception of time. Again, this is a topic that deserves a much more elaborate discussion. So much of our ability to execute a task with high proficiency has to do with getting our thinking and our actions into the correct time domain. When I say time domain, I know a number of people can get confused because time is time. People think, what do you mean by time domain? Space domain makes sense. Here, I'm not talking about outer space, whether or not you're looking in one location or another close to your body or far away from your body are different domains of space. But the time domain is a little trickier for most people to understand. Just think of it this way. When you see a slow motion movie, what you're seeing is a movie that was shot at a high frame rate, many frames per second. The typical smartphone shoots movies at about 60 frames per second, some older ones, 30 frames per second. The slow-mo function on your smartphone is actually a high frame rate function. You took the same movie, but you took it at a higher frame rate. You've got a lot more images. Therefore, you can generate slow motion. With your visual system, when you focus very close in to your body or you're focused on bodily sensations in your immediate environment, you are fine slicing in the time domain more so than when you are looking further off in the distance. Similarly, when you engage in one type of task, like a board meeting or a Zoom meeting or a conversation with friends, you are in a very different set of neural circuit functions than when you sit down to read or learn math or lift weights or go to therapy or go for a walk with your dog, for instance. Now, it should be clear why when you move from task to task you want to A, introduce a transition period. It can be very brief. Maybe, you don't even have time for the two minute transition period. You just say, OK. I'm in a transition period between task A and task B. I'm moving from this thing to that thing. I just need like 10 seconds. I'm going to recognize. I'm going to count down 10 to one or one up to 10. It doesn't matter. This is transition time. But this is not a time to look at my phone or to be in lots of different time domains. You might say, well, does that mean I shouldn't look at the horizon while I'm walking from my meeting back to my desk? No. That's not the way that your brain works. It doesn't anchor to things that just happen to be in your environment unless they're of particular interest. What I'm saying is, set a transition period between tasks ideally, two maybe as long as 10 minutes. I'm also saying that when you switch between tasks, or when you initiate your first major task of the day, please expect-- do expect-- a period in which it's hard to get into the groove, so to speak. In addition to that, I recommend having some of practice. I described the practice that I've used for some period of time now, at least for me to great success, where you are deliberately shifting your visual attention between different locations close to you and far away. You're doing that as a perceptual practice. Again, the whole thing only takes about two minutes, maybe three minutes. You don't even need to do it every day. I happen to do it every day, but I miss the occasional day here and there. Even if you were to do this perceptual practice once a week or three times a week, I'm certain that you'll benefit. Because in doing that perceptual practice, there's also an immediate recognition of the sorts of shifts that your brain is required to engage in any time you move from task A to task B or from task B to task C. You start to see and feel, literally see and feel, the way that transition occurs. It takes a little bit of time. But you can accelerate that transition if you understand that oh, when I'm looking here and engaging in this type of behavior or sets of tasks and then, I'm now going to be expected to do another task in a completely different type of environment, the brain is going to be required to shift over the neural circuits that are active and less active in order to do that. You can accelerate that process by practicing it using that perceptual tool that I described. There, I covered some specific tools that one can use to enhance one's ability to task switch, touching on a bit of the underlying neurobiology and why transition periods are useful, if not required. If you think about there's always a transition period when task switching, but here, you're taking conscious control over that transition period. There are additional tools for enhancing one's ability to task switch. They tend to be somewhat specific for the certain kinds of cognitive or physical tasks that one needs to do. The example of chess boxing that I gave earlier, a great example of task switching at its extreme, terrible example of a practice space-time bridging. Very safe, I can't think of any way in which it might be dangerous, although please don't do it while driving or while operating any other machinery. By all accounts, very safe, zero cost. We talked about some of the other tools for task switching as well. Thank you for joining for the beginning of this Ask Me Anything episode. To hear the full episode and to hear future episodes of these Ask Me Anything sessions, plus to receive transcripts of them and transcripts of the Huberman Lab podcast standard channel and premium tools not released anywhere else, please go to hubermanlab.com/premium. Just to remind you why we launched the Huberman Lab podcast Premium channel, it's really twofold. First of all, it's to raise support for the standard Huberman Lab podcast channel, which of course, will still be continued to be released every Monday in full length. We are not going to change the format or anything about the standard Huberman Lab podcast, and to fund research, in particular, research done on human beings. Not animal models, but on human beings, which I think we all agree, is a species that we are most interested in. We are going to specifically fund research that is aimed toward developing further protocols for mental health, physical health, and performance. Those protocols will be distributed through all channels, not just the premium channel, but through all channels, Huberman Lab podcast and other media channels. The idea here is to give you information to your burning questions, in depth, and allow you the opportunity to support the kind of research that provides those kinds of answers in the first place. Now, an especially exciting feature of the premium channel is that the Tiny Foundation has generously offered to do a dollar-for-dollar match on all funds raised for research through the premium channel. This is a terrific way that they're going to amplify whatever funds come in through the premium channel, to further support research for science and science-related tools for mental health, physical health, and performance. If you'd like to sign up for the Huberman Lab Premium channel, again, there's a cost of $10 per month. Or you can pay $100 up front for the entire year. That will give you access to all the AMAs. You can ask questions and get answers to your questions. You'll of course get answers to all the questions that other people ask as well. There will also be some premium content, such as transcripts of the AMAs and various transcripts and protocols of Huberman Lab Podcast episodes not found elsewhere. Again, you'll be supporting research for mental health, physical health, and performance. You can sign up for the premium channel by going to hubermanlab.com/premium. Again, that's hubermanlab.com/premium. As always, thank you for your interest in science. [MUSIC PLAYING]

========================================

--- Video 180 ---
Video ID: yOJvm_ri_hk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yOJvm_ri_hk
Title: Dr. Paul Conti: Tools and Protocols for Mental Health | Huberman Lab Guest Series
Published: 2023-09-27 12:00:51 UTC
Description:
This is episode 4 of a 4-part special series on mental health with Stanford and Harvard-trained psychiatrist Dr. Paul Conti, M.D. Dr. Conti explains what true self-care is and how our mental health benefits from specific self-care and introspection practices — much in the same way that our physical health benefits from certain exercise and nutrition habits. He describes how the foundation of mental health is an understanding of one’s own mind and the specific questions to ask in order to explore the conscious and unconscious parts of ourselves. He describes how this process can be done either on our own, through journaling, meditation and structured thought, or in therapy with the help of a licensed professional. He also explains how unprocessed trauma can short-circuit the process and how to prevent that, and the role of friendships and other relational support systems in the journey of self-exploration for mental health. People of all ages and those with and without self-introspection and therapy experience ought to benefit from the information in this episode.

#HubermanLab #Science #MentalHealth

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
BetterHelp: https://betterhelp.com/huberman 
Waking Up: https://wakingup.com/huberman 
Momentous: https://livemomentous.com/huberman

Huberman Lab Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. Paul Conti
Website: https://drpaulconti.com 
Pacific Premier Group: https://pacificpremiergroup.com 
Trauma: The Invisible Epidemic: How Trauma Works and How We Can Heal From It: https://amzlink.to/az01KBLaUX3m6
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/dr-paul-m-conti-845074216

Resources
Guest Series | Dr. Paul Conti: How to Understand & Assess Your Mental Health (Episode 1): https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/guest-series-dr-paul-conti-how-to-understand-and-assess-your-mental-health
Guest Series | Dr. Paul Conti: How to Improve Your Mental Health (Episode 2): https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/guest-series-dr-paul-conti-how-to-improve-your-mental-health
Guest Series | Dr. Paul Conti: How to Build and Maintain Healthy Relationships (Episode 3): https://www.hubermanlab.com/episode/guest-series-dr-paul-conti-how-to-build-and-maintain-healthy-relationships
The Iceberg Model: https://bit.ly/3LDNCn1
Pillars of Mental Health: https://bit.ly/48y0cOo

Timestamps
00:00:00 Self Care
00:02:37 Sponsors: BetterHelp & Waking Up
00:05:34 What is Self-Care?, Foundation, Self-Understanding
00:13:18 Life Narratives
00:15:24 Journaling, Self-Inquiry & Therapy
00:24:41 Unconscious Mind, Salience & Journaling; Panic Attacks
00:28:20 Self-Inquiry; Grief & Death
00:33:23 Sponsor: AG1
00:34:39 Self-Harm, Hopelessness & Therapy
00:37:27 Apprehension of Unconscious Mind Exploration
00:42:34 Mental Health Map: Cupboards, Agency & Gratitude, Generative Drive
00:54:18 Structure of Self, Unconscious Mind, Abscess Analogy
01:01:57 Exploring the Unconscious Mind, Curiosity, “Question the Givens”
01:10:48 Conscious Mind Exploration; Self Curiosity, Busyness
01:19:20 Exploring Defense Mechanisms, Character Structure
01:24:54 Self & Character Structure, “Tending the Garden”
01:32:45 Function of Self Cupboards
01:35:50 Self-Awareness Exploration, Mirror Meditation
01:38:34 Defense Mechanisms in Action & Self-Inquiry, Patterns
01:47:15 Salience Exploration, Grounding Meditation
01:52:37 Behavior & Self-Reflection; Phantom Driver Analogy
02:00:14 Self & Strivings; Empowerment & Humility
02:09:07 Challenges in Certain Life Domains
02:17:49 Friendships & Support, Social Media
02:23:50 Anger & Self-Care
02:34:18 Self-Care & Challenges
02:38:43 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Social Media, Momentous, Neural Network Newsletter

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

The Huberman Lab podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 181 ---
Video ID: qNzl12g0Dd8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qNzl12g0Dd8
Title: U.S. Surgeon General Dr. Vivek Murthy: Efforts & Challenges in Promoting Public Health
Published: 2023-09-25 12:00:43 UTC
Description:
In this episode, my guest is Dr. Vivek Murthy, M.D., the acting U.S. Surgeon General who earned his undergraduate degree from Harvard and his M.D. from Yale School of Medicine. We discuss nutrition, food additives, social media and mental health, public health initiatives to combat the crisis of social isolation, the obesity crisis, addiction and other pressing issues in public health. Dr. Murthy explains the role of the U.S. government in promoting specific public health issues and the steps needed to rebuild public trust in scientific and medical information. We also discuss health care accessibility, insurance barriers and individual versus team-based medical care. We also discuss topics gleaned from listener questions, such as the facts and myths about “Big Pharma” and “Big Food” industries, scientific research and public health policies.

#HubermanLab #Science #WellBeing

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Maui Nui Venison: https://mauinuivenison.com/huberman
ROKA: https://roka.com/huberman 
LMNT: https://drinklmnt.com/huberman 
Momentous: https://livemomentous.com/huberman

Huberman Lab Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. Vivek Murthy
Health & Human Services Profile: https://www.hhs.gov/about/leadership/vivek-murthy.html 
House Calls with Dr. Vivek Murthy podcast: https://www.hhs.gov/surgeongeneral/priorities/house-calls/index.html 
X (Surgeon General): https://twitter.com/Surgeon_General 
Personal Website: https://www.vivekmurthy.com 
Together: The Healing Power of Human Connection in a Sometimes Lonely World book: https://www.amazon.com/Together-Connection-Performance-Greater-Happiness/dp/0062913298 
Better Together Newsletter: https://www.vivekmurthy.com/blank 
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/drvivekmurthy/
X (personal): https://twitter.com/vivek_murthy 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/DrVivekMurthy

Articles
Habitual daily intake of a sweet and fatty snack modulates reward processing in humans: https://bit.ly/3ZuLmUK

Other Resources
Office of the Surgeon General (OSG): https://www.hhs.gov/surgeongeneral/index.html 
U.S. Surgeon General’s Advisory Social Media & Youth Mental Health: https://www.hhs.gov/surgeongeneral/priorities/youth-mental-health/social-media/index.html 
U.S Surgeon General’s Current Priorities: https://www.hhs.gov/surgeongeneral/priorities/index.html 

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Vivek Murthy
00:01:53 Sponsors: Maui Nui & ROKA
00:04:35 Surgeon General Roles
00:07:44 Illness Framework, Enhancing Wellbeing
00:12:42 Priorities as Surgeon General
00:19:50 Public Health Message Distribution
00:28:24 Diagnosis vs. Optimizing Health
00:33:04 Sponsor: AG1
00:34:01 Food Additives, Highly Processed Foods, Food Availability
00:39:11 Difficulties Addressing Health Issues & Highly Processed Foods
00:49:53 Retribution, Integrity & Public Trust
00:54:41 Company Opposition
00:58:32 Sponsor: LMNT
00:59:50 Public Health Communication, Masks & COVID-19, Public Trust
01:07:01 Masks, Humility; Building Public Trust
01:10:45 Rebuilding Relationship to Public, Vaccines
01:17:41 Community Core & Diversity; Federal Funding
01:24:55 Big Pharma, “Pill for Every Problem” Society 
01:31:48 Interdisciplinary Medical Teams, Individualized & Value-Based Medical Models
01:38:44 Insurance Barriers, Mental Health Care, Drug Prices
01:44:40 Isolation Crisis, Social Disconnection, Health Risks 
01:49:15 Community Organizations & Modern Life, Social Media
01:56:36 Youth & Social Media, Parents, Policy Change
02:06:45 Real Life vs. Social Media, Kids & Playtime
02:11:56 Social Media Advice for Parents
02:20:43 Society & Disconnection, Human Connection & Service
02:31:20 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, YouTube Feedback, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

The Huberman Lab podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday [Music] life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Opthalmology at Stanford school of medicine today my guest is Dr vivc Murthy Dr vivc Murthy is a medical doctor and acting Surgeon General of the United States as Surgeon General of the United States Dr Murthy oversees more than 6,000 dedicated Public Health officers whose job is to protect protect promote and Advance our nation's Public Health Dr Murthy received his bachelor's degree from Harvard University and his medical degree from the Yale University School of Medicine today's discussion covers some of the most important issues in public health not just within the United States but worldwide including nutrition and the Obesity crisis as well as food additives and why certain food chemicals and additives are allowed in the United States versus in other countries we also discuss mental health the youth mental Mental Health crisis the adult Mental Health crisis and the global crisis of loneliness and isolation we also talk about corporate interests that is whether or not big food and big Pharma Industries actually impact the research Andor decisions that the US Surgeon General takes in his directives toward public health and of course we discussed some of the major public health events that occurred over the last 5 years and the current and future landscape of how to restore Faith both in public health officials in public health policy and science more generally by the end of today's episode you not only will have learned a tremendous amount about public health and why you hear the particular Public Health directives that you do but also how to better interpret future Public Health directives you will also come to learn that as Surgeon General Dr Murthy has both an extremely challenging job but one that he meets with a tremendous amount of both rigor and compassion before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is how however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is Maui Nei venison Maui Nei venison is the most nutrient-dense and delicious red meat available I've spoken before on this podcast in Solo episodes and with guests about the need to get approximately 1 gram of high quality protein per pound of body weight each day for optimal nutrition now there are many different ways that one can do that but a key thing is to make sure that you're not doing that by ingesting excessive calories Maui Nei venison has the highest density of quality protein per calorie and it achieves that in delicious things like ground Meats venison steaks jerky and bone broth I particularly like the ground venison I make those into venison burgers probably five times a week or more I also like the jerky for its convenience especially when I'm traveling or I'm especially busy with work and know that I'm getting an extremely nutrient-dense high quality source of protein if you'd like to try Maui Nei venison you can go to mauii Venison dcom huberman and get 20% off your first order again that's Maui venison docomond to get 20% off today's episode is also brought To Us by Roka Roa makes eyeglasses and sunglasses that are of the absolute highest quality I've spent a life time working on the biology the visual system and I can tell you that your visual system has to contend with an enormous number of challenges order for you to be able to see clearly in different environments Roa understands the biology of the visual system and has designed their eyeglasses and sunglasses so that you always see with Crystal Clarity originally their glasses were designed for performance that is for running and cycling and for sport and indeed they can still be used for performance they won't slip off your face if you get sweaty they're extremely lightweight but I should mention that Roa eyeglasses and sunglasses come in some of the Aesthetics more typically associated with performance glasses like those cyborg style glasses but they also have a number of styles that you would be perfectly comfortable wearing out to dinner or to work I wear readers at night or when I drive and I wear sunglasses during the day if I happen to be driving into bright light or outside and it's just overwhelmingly bright I do not wear sunglasses when I do my morning sunlight viewing to set my circadian rhythm and I suggest that you do the same if you'd like to try Roa eyeglasses or sunglasses you can go to Roka r.com and enter the code hubman to save 20% off your first order again that's Roa r and enter the code huberman at checkout and now for my discussion with Dr vivc Murthy Dr vivec Murthy welcome thanks so much Andrew and please call me vi I'm informal okay VI my understanding based on my internet search is that the role of the US Surgeon General is to provide scientific information on how to improve health and reduce risk of illness and injury do I have that correct that is correct what are some other roles that you play that perhaps would not come up in a a top uh top hit uh Google search that that I ought to be aware of and that our audience ought to be aware of well here's how I I generally explain to people there there two primary roles the Surgeon General has one is to engage with the public and make sure that people know about critical public health issues that they so they know what they are how to protect themselves and their families this second role of the General is lesser known but it's equally as important which is to oversee one of the eight Uniformed Services in the US government and that is the United States Public Health Service many people are familiar with the Army the Navy the Air Force we also have the US Public Health Service which is 6,000 officers they include doctors nurses physical therapists pharmacists Public Health Engineers a whole range of of healthcare folks and their job is to protect our nation from public health threats so when Ebola came on the scene in 2014 in a major way in West Africa we sent hundreds of officers to West Africa to set up the Monrovia medical unit in Liberia to treat people with li with uh with ebola domestically when there are hurricanes or tornadoes we dispatch officers and deploy them to go help strengthen the social the public health infrastructure but also to provide Direct Care we deployed thousands of officers during coid so these officers uh I'm incredibly proud of them uh they could be doing lots of stuff you know outside government in the private sector probably making a whole lot more money and getting a you know working a lot less hard but they're really committed to protecting the public health of the nation so I have the privilege of overseeing that service as Surgeon General and those those are those are the jobs that I've signed up for in this role got it I was not aware of that role and if I understood correctly these people um these Public Health officers um that presumably are made up of physician and licensed psychologists and nurses and so forth um you said they could be making uh substantially higher incomes in the private sector but the work that they're doing with you is their sole career at this point they're completely devoted to that or they're doing this as a side Hustle No they are full-time uh government employees and and members of the Public Health Service their day job is often in public health agencies where they're embedded in communities helping day-to-day to advance public health and during times of emergency uh we deploy them uh you know and and they're they're extraordinarily well trained uh they're experienced at dealing with adversity but they bring a combination of skill and heart to their work and you really need both to be effective at public health I'm glad that you mention the word emergency because in preparing for our discussion today it occurred to me that in this uh list of roles that uh your title assumes that scientific information on how to improve health comes first then you mentioned emergency so what I'd like to talk about first is Health not lack of Health but Health you know so often we hear about um the Mental Health crisis but what we're really talking about is the lack of Mental Health crisis AKA mental illness and rarely do we hear for instance what constitutes mental health we hear what constitutes mental illness whereas in the domain of physical health there's a lot of information out there about how to be more physically healthy cardiovascular exercise resistance exercise yoga typee exercise Mobility Etc and of course some people have physical health ailments and there's a lot of information in terms of how to deal with that as well but what I would like to know before we get into the long list of issues that uh our nation confronts um everything from obesity to food additives to mental health issues what is going well in other words in the last let's say five 5 to 10 years have there been any areas of physical health and mental health Improvement in the US at large that we can attribute to some of the public health initiatives uh directly so that's a really good question and let me just also say about the very first point you raised that you're absolutely right that we have operated primarily through an illness frame when we look at health and in my mind that's only one half of the equation right so when we are talking about physical illness for example uh you know as a doctor I learned how to diagnose and treat someone with diabetes or with high blood pressure or with coronary heart disease but we also know that even if I don't have diabetes or coronary heart disease uh or high blood pressure even if I don't have any diagnosable medical condition I may not be at an optimal level of physical health right I may not be able to for example walk around the block without getting shorter breath I may not be able to play with my kids because my physical fitness and stamina is is insufficient I may not be able to lift my luggage when I go to the airport because I don't have enough strength in my body yet I wouldn't have a diagnosable mental illness so I think it's easier to understand there with physical health that we're not just aiming for lack of illness we're aiming to optimize our physical health the same is true with mental health and I think when we talk about mental health people think we're just the sole goal here is to prevent diagnosable mental illness that is one goal to both prevent and to manage uh mental illness when it arises but we also need to recognize there's a whole other half of the spectrum where there people who may not have diagnosable mental illness but are not operating optimally in their lives and that's detracting from their fulfillment from their functionality like in not just at work but also in their communities and in their families and so I think part of the conversation that that I want us to have as a country is about how to optimize mental health and well-being and that is includes preventing Mental Illness but it is much broader and bigger uh than that alone great yeah I think it's so important that we recognize that um treating disease is critical obviously but that there's a lot that can be done to improve one's Health even in the absence of any known disease and um and you've got all these officers these incredible Physicians and uh nurses and uh people at uh your disposal I My Hope Is that they would also be accessible for and currently carrying out um efforts to transmit information to people about hey here are the things that you can do every day every week every month in order to make your life as as healthy as possible um as well as you know rushing in under conditions of you know Public Health crisis yeah it's a good good point and it's certainly you know many of our officers do focus on this broader rubric around well-being but it's part of how we need I think the the broader health system and public health system to operate even outside of government and this I think will require significant change and shift in how we think about our jobs like when I went to medical school the vast majority of the focus was on diagnosing and treating illness it was much much less focused on thinking about how to enhance well-being and when you ask talk to people in their lives it becomes clear that they want to do more than just prevent diagnosable illness they they want to be able to walk their their child down the aisle they want and have the endurance to do that they want to be able to uh be independent often and carry their groceries or carry their luggage um this is why I think we've got to broaden our focus in in public health and look when I came into this role um by the way I was not expecting to serve in government this was not part of some 5 10 30 year plan uh when I was a a kid I was interested in medicine but I always thought I was going to practice medicine you know like my dad did and like my like the clinic my mom ran you know set up put up a shing sing Le see patients and uh be a primary care doctor and and feel good about the work I was doing but what happened to me along the way is uh you know I I trained in medicine I got interested in technology spent seven years building a technology company uh that was focused on health I got I was I became increasingly worried about the way we were delivering Healthcare and it felt like our healthare system was broken people who needed care couldn't get it it was often too expensive to get care we were focusing on treatment solely and not enough on prevention so I started getting involved in in advocating for a Better Health Care system with doctors around the country when despite all that I still never thought I would work in government but in 2013 uh is when President Obama's team had reached out to me and asked if I'd be interested in considering the position of Surgeon General and what was interesting to me about this position is it's actually very different from most positions uh that are appointed by President and government and that it's supposed to be an independent position so my agenda the issues I choose to take on are not determined by a president or a party they're determined by science and the public interest uh and that's what's what guides me you know and that's what that's what guided me in that first term when I served and when President Biden asked me to come back and serve as Surgeon General a second time that's what's guided me here too um so Biden um is not sending you notes saying hey could you put some effort into uh you know getting messages out about you know Co or could you put more effort into um getting your team over to Maui to deal with the you know the you know the tragedy there and which is a long Arc tragedy right we get the news in a in a in a blast of this happened and then the next blast comes in about something else and we forget that there are physical and mental health crises that are ongoing um and and then I have to imagine then start to overlap with one another or is it so is it your decision um where and how to deploy the financial and and Human Resources like okay we're going to put 10 people on Maui yeah we're going to um put uh you know five people in the Central States you know going around talking to um major organizations about what they need to do to prepare for this winter is that how it works or are you getting memos and um in other words who's your boss everyone has a boss at some level mine are is are the listeners of of this podcast at some level I work for them it used to also be my bulldog um but my my boss my wife and my two kids who are five and seven they I do what they tell me to got it got it so um but how we make our decisions in the office actually it's a bit different uh with those two roles so on with with the second one with overseeing the commission Corp our 6,000 officers they the the decisions about how and when we deploy officers are collaborative right so I you know we work with other colleagues throughout the Department of Health and Human Services we work with people in FEMA across the administration but we also work with States so sometimes states often often States will put in a request and say hey we need support here uh can you help so we'll work with colleagues across our department to say okay well we can mobilize our commission core officers what assets can you mobilize and then collectively we will send a team out there so for example we have officers helping in Maui right now uh particularly with mental health needs uh which are I worry only going to continue to grow over the weeks and months ahead on the other side of the house when when it comes to deciding which issues we engage with the public on like in this case mental health has been a big Focus uh area for me on on that front well we certainly you know are open to suggestions from the public members of Congress sometimes say hey can you help the public understand about this issue you know a lot of people have ideas and opinions but the decision about which issues to focus on those are our offices uh and to me that's important because part of the reason over time I believe the public came to have some degree of faith and trust in the office office is because they hope that the office was functioning the way you hope your doctor is functioning which is being an independent source of information for you uh and a source that has your best interest at heart that's not being pulled aside by political interests or by other agendas but the primary agenda is how can I help your health and so for me like we have to make an independent assessment there and say okay where is the need uh the greatest tier where can we make the biggest difference sometimes we may not build an initiative on an issue and that doesn't mean that that ISU is not important or that it's not affecting a lot of people but we have to make hard decisions about where to put limited resources and so when I was a Surgeon General the the first time one of the big areas I focused on was the opioid crisis uh that we were dealing with as well as the E ecigarette use among youth because we were seeing a dramatic increase uh among kids in ecigarette use that was can I just ask you sorry to interrupt but I think it's relevant here um has that increase continued or ecigarette use AKA vaping yeah yeah so we still see unfortunately there there's been some improvements but we still see way too many kids who are using uh vaping devices early on and part of what we did from our office is recognizing that we actually issued the first Federal report on ecigarettes and youth uh we call the country's attention to the fact that this is a crisis we worked with members of Congress uh to talk about the kind of action we needed uh from a legislative and Regulatory perspective and worked with colleagues at the FDA and in government as well but there are two things that are really most important in guiding our choice about priorities uh one is data we look at what the numbers actually tell us about the impact these issues are having on the population as well as the trajectory of Rise if something's getting dramatically worse and people don't realize it might be an area for us to focus but the other critical factor is what I hear from people on the road so I try to spend as much time as I can visiting communities across the country doing Town Halls meeting with uh community members and just trying to frankly just listen to what's on their mind and that's where I actually get a lot of information as well that tell like that's actually how I came to focus on the issue of loneliness and isolation it wasn't because it popped up in a report uh as being uh the the leading public health issue in the country it was because everywhere I was going in 2014 2015 whether I was talking to college students talking to retired Americans talking to parents in rural areas and urban areas I kept hearing these stories about people who felt like they were on their own or they felt invisible or they felt if they disappeared tomorrow no one would even care or they felt like they just didn't belong and it's heartbreaking to hear that from anyone it's particularly heartbreaking to hear it from kids uh who you hope are entering life and looking forward to what comes uh but many kids weren't feeling that way that is very useful context and we will get back to the isolation um crisis um such an important initiative that that um I just will thank you now for having put out the the message on social media and elsewhere um about that um because I think one of the questions I have in light of what you just said is it's clear that you got your ear to the ground you're talking to different people um it's also critically important that people hear from you and know um not just what's happening but that you perhaps want to know what uh you know where the issues lie and what the um what the actionable steps are that people can take right and I think that we now live in a hyperconnected world um so you know in fact I'll just say that one of the reasons I launched this podcast is in 2020 I was going on podcast talking about things like maintaining sleep and circadian rhythm and stuff from my lab related to trying to um adjust anxiety under under conditions where I think everyone was anxious and sleep rhythms were disrupted Etc um and I was somewhat surprised that that I didn't get a warning on my phone hey make sure you're getting morning sunlight you know like I I'll get a flood warning uh you know I'll get a warning that I might get a warning but it's only a test warning I'll get three of those yesterday living here near the coast but um I don't think once during the pandemic did I get a email or a public service announcement saying hey you know if you are going to be indoors a lot you're going to have to be mindful of maintaining your circadian rhythm because if you're not I we know based on hundreds of studies now that drifts and circadian rhythmicity are a precursor to mental health issues I mean in fact there's a new idea that many not all suicides um are preceded by a period of disrupted sleep which is you know kind of makes sense in in um and it's not uh causal of course but how come during the pandemic we each and all as US citizens did not get an email or a text message saying hey these are five things that you need to do every day to try and stay as stable as possible in this very uncertain landscape that we're in well it's a really good question and and I think it's a it's a reasonable and a very good suggestion to say that hey look there should be a clear and comprehensive way that we can get messages out to everyone um like if we were working in a hospital system and there was a safety issue that came up there would be an email sent to all the hospital staff members saying hey this is something you need to be aware of right so I think it's a reasonable expectation uh practically if you go back though over the last 20 30 years for on a on health issues there hasn't been sort of an agency or an entity that has sent emails out to everyone first of all how to send an email out to everyone in America is not a simple proposition either technically it's challenging there's some legal issues you'd have to deal with as well but you could do a night where you go CNN Fox NBC ABC New York Times Wall Street like you could hit the right the the right wi the left wing and everything yeah that's a really interesting suggest like one but one one video just where they all agree like hey this is important information so a apolitical like no yeah so I would say that that kind of messaging I would say through traditional media certainly has happened you know and it happened during coid uh it happened for example when um you know during the first year of coid I was a private citizen you know in the private private Administration but I you know I watched both then and at the beginning of the the Biden Administration um many officials would go out in front of cameras and say here are three things you need to do to keep yourself safe uh you know from from coid as and that was a big question people had how do I keep myself safe okay here are three things you can do a couple of challenges I would say here is that number one even if you hit all the major Network and cable news shows you're still not reaching everyone right because we're living in a in a society where increasingly people are not watching TV right they're getting their news from other sources um the other thing uh that's important to know is that attention shifts quickly you know in traditional media also from issue to issue and so you might get a clip you know out at a certain uh day or you might get on all the Sunday shows for example but the next day you know that message isn't necessarily there you know it's it's gone and people's attention has also switched off too so there were I mean I can count and you know we've logged probably thousands of interviews at this point that we've done with mainstream media with sort of you know concise messages about three things you can do to protect yourself Etc and you know I'm glad we did those we got to do them but I think one of the things we they don't we don't have right now in the country and this is an I think a bit of an Health infrastructure challenge is we actually don't have a quick efficient way to reach everyone in the country with a health message just like what you you said you know what if you wanted to get that message about three things to protect yourself from let's say coid or three things to do to you know support your health and well-being during a time of Crisis or during a time of Health I mean again like not just the flood warning but the the the daily because I I do think that most of mental and physical health is the result of daily practices that are you know that build on themselves sort of like compounding compounded Investments and then of course there are acute challenges and chronic challenges that people face but things of that sort too I I I think those kind of messages in time of Health are are absolutely important as well and uh you know I think I think in the sort of I think fast-paced crisis-driven environment that we live in uh unfortunately people are often less are paying less attention to those maintenance and Improvement messages than they are to managing the crisis messages but I think that they're equally as important but I do think that what you're pointing out is an infrastructure piece that that needs to be built which is a way for uh you know Health authorities to reach people you know with information quickly and comprehensively uh I'll just tell you that in the 1980s when C ever coup was Surgeon General one thing that he had done done which was interesting is he had actually sent a letter a physical letter uh to all households in America about HIV a physical letter a physical letter some of our listeners won't know what that is yeah so thing you read about in the history books or something shows up in your mailbox and you open it and um hopefully something you want to read this Cas this case he was worried about HIV about the fact that people didn't know about it so he worked through an with as I understand it with a member of Congress found you know a way to do this from a funding perspective but it was a very unusual move uh and one that was never replicated since and there was never infrastructure or funding to do that again um when I was Surge General last time you know you know some years ago and then this time around one of the things I did do is I was able ble to send a physical letter to the medical community uh the first time it was about the opioid use crisis and about changing our prescribing practices in medicine so that we expose fewer patients to the harm of opioids while making sure people who needed them actually got them and the second time it was about coid Therapeutics it was about making sure that when we had data about medicines that actually work like paid that we may actually offered them to patients made them available to patients because we were realizing that many people weren't getting offered life-saving medic iations even though they were in high risk groups um so we were able to find you know and we had to again there two had to sort of creatively Cobble together resources funding this is all sort of you know sort of behind the scenes government stuff but the the bottom line is in in what you want in an emergency uh and what you want I think in the long term is a simple clear comprehensive way that public health messages can get out to people and to this day what we still have to rely on are one traditional channels like you know traditional media to cover the initiatives we put out whether it's on social media and youth mental health or on loneliness or on youth mental health more broadly uh we will have to rely on online channels uh which which we do as well or we have to look to creative Partnerships that we build with people who reach different audiences and then together uh we try to get out messages our office does all three uh of these but uh it's a patchwork uh and and you know and it's not always ideal but it's what we do now I think part of what this reflects is a broader challenge like in government but also in society more broadly which is that we have valued historically prevention and health communication very little we put the mass majority of our resources into treatment strategies into getting medications to people into diagnosis and that's very important don't get me wrong but we are now seeing with mental health just as one example that if we only focus on expanding treatment and deepening our well of knowledge there and we don't do anything to help people stay well that we just can't keep up right and right because one problem feeds the other the kids that are stay listen I if I would grown up in today's era I'd be on my phone and tablet late at night because I was up reading magazines and talking to friends on the phone late at night right so it's not a criticism but but you know disruptions in sleep disruptions in circadian rhythm disruptions lack of physical activity poor nutrition social social isolation I mean these are all piling the sand much higher on this in this other side of what you do in terms of and here I'm obviously stating the obvious you know so it's just going to create a mountain of issues on the other side which presumably has a larger budget is what I'm sensing but doesn't um but there's no way that budget is large enough to deal with that I mean if somebody's kid for instance is um trying to address the issue of whether or not to go on prescription medications and or by the way folks and or change their dietary intake because they feel they might have ADHD for instance I mean what are they going to do they're going to Google they're going to listen to podcast that they they should be able to write first to your organization and say you know what is the highest level stringency data say about these issues and AI should be able to tell them accurately yeah and maybe you have somebody chime in for them I mean we all pay taxes I pay federal and state taxes um me too and and and to some extent happily so right um because it pays for public works and and many many important things police officers firefighters Etc but if you don't have a channel to communicate with people about what they and their kids and their relatives can do then like to some extent it feels like it it's um it's a culde saac it's like how how how how in the world can we get healthy again or healthier as a as a country the part that keeps me up at night is and one of some of the hardest decisions I have to make in the office are putting aside issues that we know deserve a lot more time and attention uh but we just really don't have the resources to deal with you know the issues that we have dealt with I'm certainly proud of my team that we worked hard to try to raise awareness of the issues we have taken on whether it's around you know social media and youth and mental health or whether around isolation or clinical clinician burnout or other issues like that but the truth is that that there's more that needs to be done more issues that need to be tackled and we have to get to a place where we can uh you know talk about what I think of as the core pillars of a healthy life right which are sleep our nutrition our physical activity our social relationships like these are all vital elements to living a healthy life right now we're not teaching kids about this in school right but if you think about education uh and school as a place and a force that should PR prep kids for the rest of their lives they should lay a foundation for a healthy life going forward these absolutely are important elements for kids to learn about I I think it's as important for kids to learn about how to build and maintain healthy relationships in their life as it is frankly for them to learn how to read and write and I know that's a strong statement to make but it is true in terms of its contribution to their their happiness their fulfillment their health and their success yeah I I I could not agree more uh we have a series that's out now with a psychiatrist Paul kti about mental health not mental illness about self-inquiry and how to use self-inquiry and practices that do not require uh a therapist in order to bolster mental mental health um of course therapists can be very useful but not everyone has access right and not everyone feels comfortable doing that um but we are but one channel I mean you are the governing body for this um you're the Army uh Navy and Marine so to speak of of Health as many of you know I've been taking ag1 daily since 2012 so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast ag1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that's designed to meet all of your foundational nutrition needs now of course I try to get enough servings of vitamins and minerals through whole food sources that include vegetables and fruits every day but often times I simply can't get enough servings but with ag1 I'm sure to get enough vitamins and minerals and the probiotics that I need and it also contains adaptogens to help buffer stress simply put I always feel better when I take ag1 I have more focus and energy and I sleep better and it also happens to taste great for all these reasons whenever I'm asked if you could take Just One supplement what would it be I answer ag1 if you'd like to try ag1 go to drink a1.com huberman to claim a special offer they'll give you five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 to again that's drink a1.com huberman there's lots more to explore there um we may have to do several uh of these together but um to touch on all of them but maybe we could um talk about a few of the things that um our listeners asked about when I solicited for questions I got more than 10,000 responses across social media in a very short amount of time but there was some redundancy um one of the things that I'm very curious can I just say on that point though and one I'm really glad that you asked uh folks to submit questions and it was really excited to see how many people actually wrote in uh but I think it's also just a testament to how you've done such an incredible job building a channel to the public to let people know about these topics that you know that are so vital to our health and well-being whether it's sleep or physical activity or mental health uh and so I just want to thank you for all the work you're doing trying to help people understand more about health and clearly the fact that that folks are engaging they're sending questions and they're sending comments to you means that you're building a relationship there with a lot of folks so just kudos to you for doing that well thank you the the audience of the huberman Lab podcast is is the only reason we do it I mean I love learning and teaching but um that's the truth so they are the podcast um the podcast is them um so thank you for that uh there were a lot of questions and I also wonder about why is it that many food additives and preservatives and dyes and things of that sort that are not allowed in Europe are allowed in US Food Products it's a really good question and decisions around food and food safety in particular are made by the Food and Drug Administration so that's the FDA uh it's not it's a separate agent independent agency it's not one that our office uh is involved in then sort of directing in any way uh and so we're not involved in those decisions and don't have insight into how they're making their drawing their conclusions but uh they do it in a process just that's you know Guided by science just like they do with medications with devices Etc with that said you know I am concerned that dietary practices the food that many Americans are consuming are in fact not supporting their health and well-being and in many ways are detracting from it uh when we look at highly processed foods one of the concerns I have there is we often see sodium content is very high we see the sugar content uh is very high and you know there are certainly additives in there as well U that I think we I would love to have more data on the actual Health impacts of those but the bottom line is that a significant portion of our diet uh is comprised of Highly processed foods in America and and that worries me the AL other piece of this that worries me are just how much you know refined sugars are being added to so much of our foods and most people think that sugars are only added to things like desserts Etc but you look at spaghetti sauces salad dressing salad dressings a lot of these things which we think of as Savory products have have sugar added to them as well and so we are consuming I think unhealthy levels of sugar in our diet we're consuming a fair amount of additives given the processed food composition in our diet and I think part of the reason this is happening and I want to be very clear I don't fault individuals out there for the composition of their diet necessarily because we have also made certain decisions in our country about uh what we subsidize about what's cheaper and more expensive for people and the cheapest Foods unfortunately are often the most unhealthy Foods the most highly processed foods uh if you are somebody who lives in a low-income neighborhood number of these neighborhoods don't even have grocery stores in them which is a you know a tragedy because you can't get fresh produce Etc a lot of times your shopping your grocery shopping may be done at a local convenience store uh at a 7-Eleven or at you know or somewhere else that may not have like the array of of fresh fruits and vegetables that you and your family need I don't even think they have vegetables I think they have they'll occasionally have some lemons or apples or oranges and bananas but when I walk into a convenience store what I see as a pharmacy I really do I see alcohol caffeine energy drinks that have a number of different things in them designed to stimulate different neuromodulators like dopamine and serotonin I see nicotine products I see high sugar high highly processed foods and keep in mind I was a teenager I mean I drank my Slurpees I had my butter fingers you know I wasn't you know Bart Simpson like in my lovely butter fingers but I liked them but but it was it was a smaller fraction of of what we ate and when we were at home those Foods were either not available or we weren't we certainly weren't allowed to eat them and um at libum you know um okay so what's clear to me is that the FDA makes decisions about what is safe what's not safe but for instance okay this last year there were several papers published in highquality journals showing that if people eat just High just Sweet and Savory Foods combined that neural in the brain rewire through process of neuroplasticity that drives increased appetite and changes the response to healthier food so that they don't taste as as satiating okay that's sort of a duh to a lot of people but I think it was an important set of findings because it said the brain actually changes in response to the um the very uh Rich flavorful foods that are associated with with highly processed or even moderately processed foods okay I mean um that's just a couple of studies um there was nothing in those studies that said if you eat these Foods you're going to develop cancer but you know at some point one has to as a citizen a taxpaying citizen speaking on behalf of many other taxpaying citizens I have to sort of take a step back and say how long do we wait right do we have to get a randomized clinical trial about the you know the you know the five 100,000 sick kids that grow into sick adults um and then run a trial where they go on a an Elimination Diet where they're eating only unprocessed vegan or unprocessed meat and vegetable or unprocessed you know starch and vegetable but I mean I mean then we're talking about a 30-year Health crisis before we intervene why not I mean if I were in charge which I'm not and clearly I wouldn't survive in a government organization because um well I've got the uniform down um I always wear the same thing but um a uniform but I wouldn't because I would want to say wait you know why not a on the side of caution why not send out this AI generated text message that tells everybody in all the languages that Americans speak and can understand hey you get to make choices about what you eat but you should be aware that um making your diet comprised of more than 15 to 20% of these Foods is potentially going to lead to serious issues down the road and those serious issues are extremely serious I mean the Obesity crisis is really a crisis of both body and brain metabolic challenge um that we can talk about so you know who sets the thresholds you know in other words why is it that in this country we have to wait until people start to get really sick and dying and really struggling before something is done in the direction of their health and I'm not blaming you I just want to understand because um good question the the wealthy people I know care a lot about their food sources and they pay a lot of attention to it and why aren't we allowing everyone the opportunity to make better choices so this is the right question and this is something I I think about a lot because I'm conscious about what I eat but I also talk to folks around the country and realize a lot of people don't have either the information uh or the resources to actually purchase healthy food right and to know like what's going to be good for them and for their families this is why you know I mentioned we have a list of issues that you know we would work on you know if we had more more more resources this is actually one of them because to me one of the most common questions people ask is what should I eat that's simple but it's it's vexing it's complicated it's incredibly confusing if you go online and just try to search for information and it's a classic example of where it's important to have an objective scientific Authority that can come and then speak on Broad principles around diet that can talk about what we know and don't know so here's important thing I think a lot of times people may see something as uh you know on the market they might read list of ingredients they don't recognize how of them because they're additives but they figure well if it's there then it must have been studied for 30 40 years and there must be no harmful consequences right but sometimes things are are put out there because we have short-term data that says that they're okay and there might be uh but there may be a need for more long-term data helping people understand what do we know what do we not know is important so that people can make decisions for themselves based on how much risk they want to take the other thing that that concerns me here Andrew is I look I I have I'll tell you I have a bias here and my bias is that I am worried about the you know additives and other products we have in food that don't have long-term data uh that's clear in terms of health risk and so because of that like my bias is generally to think how can we get people uh you know minimally or less processed foods and how can we get them more fruits and vegetables how can we make sure that they have that more available to them but we've got to not only make the information available but we have to make it accessible from a cost perspective if you don't have a grocery store in your community if vegetables and fruits cost 3x what other foods do that's going to be a problem right to change diet the other thing we have to keep in mind is that you know food companies you know a lot of them do a great job of actually trying to get healthy nutritious food out to people you know and kudos to them but I worry also that there's an incentive also to just try to sell more and more and more of your product and one of the ways to do that is to try to hack uh the body to kind of figure out okay well what kind of synthetic additives could I put together here or what kind of uh combination of nutrients could I put together that will get people coming back for more and more and more and we saw this in the nicotine industry you saw the Nick industry you also I would say another parallels you see it in social media as well where the business model of the social media platforms is built on volume of use right how much time am I spending on the platforms it's not quality of time it's quantity of time right so if that's the business model then you're going to design your platform to Max maximize how much time someone spends on them regardless of whether it's detracting from sleep detracting from inperson interaction detracting from anything else it's healthy regardless of whether that may be causing certain harms right like the business model dictates you know in many ways how these things are designed and that applies I think to food as well so which is why I think it's incumbent upon us to be particularly cautious uh with highly processed foods foods that foods that have additives and to understand how is this impacting our brain how is that impacting our satiety how is it um leading potentially to Greater ingestion that is healthy and leading to things like obesity which have a whole host of other medical conditions from cancer to arthritis to diabetes and heart disease associated with it those are the questions as a as a citizen as a father of two young kids who's trying to bring them up at with a healthy lifestyle those are the questions that I would want to know the answers to and it's one of the reasons I think these kind of objective reports are so important for the public I'm starting to see the the scope of the problem and the mechanics involved in trying to alleviate these issues are complex I I I I see that they are also one other thing that is important to do that so is you need to have authorities that can speak to these issues that are insulated from political retribution right so and to explain this like Amen to that yeah I mean listen as somebody forgive me for interrupting but somebody who from time to time will um make not recommendations but we'll offer information about potential actionable items you know things that people could do or not do according to a couple of studies that come have come out I mean have come under intense scrutiny from my colleagues um who are like wait that's not a randomized control trial how can you do that and yet I know from being in this field for a long time that for instance the emerging therapies for for PTSD and depression that are now based on federal funding for things like um and I'm not recommending this by the way for children or for everybody but for instance the um macro do psilocybin therapeutically supported uh legal use of psilocybin for for uh major depression the data there are they're not perfect but they're pretty darn good compared to the major ssris um but for years if if an academic said the the words I just said they'd lose their job almost instantaneously because they're Controlled Substances um that's a that's a Todo but then there are a number of things that we're talking about here that are just about making better choices about things to avoid right if people understood I think that um is sugar poison well some of my audience will say sugar is poison it's as addictive as cocaine look it is not as addictive as cocaine or heroin it is not however if a child or adult is eating very sweet or very Savory Foods of any kind consistently if those are not um healthy foods or if they are if they contain unhealthy additives over time the brain will rewire so that healthy foods don't taste is good they won't be the choices that people make and you're going to end up with a sick individual period And I don't think we need one more clinical trial funded by federal tax dollars to support that statement what I'm starting to gather is that you're a very rational grounded broad thinkinking individual I'm not just saying that because you're sitting here and you're trained in medicine and you understand the science uh but that you don't have the means at your disposal to put out a call that says hey folks having some sugar every once in a while treating the kids to ice cream great but if 80% or more of the diet it of our kids isn't made up of minimally or non-processed Foods their brains are going to be rewired in unhealthy ways and you can almost expect that they're going to have some Health Challenge in the future that may not be um you know autism or schizophrenia but is going to be a major Health Challenge of a and that is serious and Now's the Time to intervene by avoiding certain things and if you don't want to do it look it's a free country at that level you're welcome to do it but you'd be better off spending X number of dollars on these healthier foods yeah because there's also and we know this from my colleague Ali crum's laboratory at Stanford that even the mere knowledge that certain foods are nutritious can lead to more satiety from eating those Foods at the level of hormone release not just psychologically you're telling yourself the Orange is as tasty and and filling as a candy bar but the understanding of of the fact that it is nutritious actually leads to shifts in patterns of of you know grillin secretion Etc that that change so people can be feel better on a healthier slightly lower calorie nutrient enrich diet of healthy proteins and fruits and vegetables and it's not a mind trick it's it's physiology anyway I I I think um I I feel your pain frankly and I'll tell you look sometimes people ask hey why don't you just go out and say a couple of statements that you just said would that be fine like why why is time needed to prep something like that why are resources needed Etc here's actually why like I know in today's day and age it's easy to just go and like rattle off off you know off the cff statements or shoot from the Welcome on my social media channels anytime and really to get the word out to millions of people I appreciate that and I may take you up on that but I'll tell you that one of the reason one of the things we always do recognizing that when we put out statements that people people one they they trust it's coming from a scientific Authority and that it's been vetted right so we put the effort and time into vetting this thoroughly we check sources we look at the data we talk to experts we think about how to communicate this in the right way that's the work the behind the scenes work sure uh that we do before we put out sort of reports and and initiatives because we want people to have confidence you know in in what they're hearing we also know that when we put out initiatives that other people build on them philanthropists you know and and foundations will then think about should I fund work in this area uh you know schools and workplaces will think about shifting some of their practice policy makers will also think about legislation uh that they may uh want to design based on that so we want to make sure it it's really solid but the point I was making when I said also that we have to make sure that not just our office but folks who are you know in public health and who are in medicine who are trying to speak to the public about their health that they're protected from retribution and taxes this is what I meant which is that saying things about diet saying things about tobacco these can be challenging for some folks because there are Industries built around these right which may not always like what you have to say uh if it hurts their business model or their bottom line and they may then lean on um political leaders elected leaders others to then try to silence you or or shut you up and I'll tell you I've experienced this in the past you know when I was Surgeon General during my first term I had issued two uh key reports one was on alcohol drugs and health about the addiction crisis uh and the other was about the ecigarette crisis among youth I will tell you that there were plenty of people who were very unhappy that I was issuing the First Federal report on ecigarettes um folks who felt that hey um this is going to make folks unhappy it's going to create political pressure uh it's going to create a lot of problems uh similarly with alcohol drugs and health there are many folks who said hey if you do this you're really going to upset the AL alol industry do you really need to have alcohol in the report why don't you just focus on other drugs um why don't you take alcohol out of the title you know all of these sort of you know concerns telling you this who so these are people who get paid by the alcohol industry no these are people in government who are reading the te leaves and who who are supportive of the work we're doing but are saying hey like you're going to really upset a lot of people in industry and you're also going to help a lot of people yeah well this is what it comes down to they say well and if you upset folks then they're going to try to fire you they're going to try to do all these things to which honestly like my my response to a lot of these and the reason we just put them out anyway was because I said well the worst thing that can happen is I get fired and that's okay you know if I if I go out knowing I did the right thing here then I'm fine with that I'm not looking to build a lifelong career in government I'm not doing this job to like you know get to the next thing on the ladder like this is about serving for the time I can I want to be able to go to sleep at night look myself in the mirror and know I did so with Integrity um so that was an easy decision for me but but my point is that like we have to be thoughtful that in these issues that there are going to be headwinds right I'm sure in your case for example you've probably gotten push back from folks about talking about certain things that may have rankled folks who may have had an interest in those issues and that's okay you keep talking about them as as you should and I'm grateful for that um but this is especially important at a time where I think public trust in our institutions more broadly and in science and in medicine medicine have taken a hit over the last few years and I think it's a time where we have to be even more Vigilant those of us in medicine and public health to make sure that what we do is based on data that we're transparent about why we're saying what we're saying that we're also clear about what we know and what we don't know so that if recommendations change over time people recognize that this isn't necessarily flip-flopping you should change your recommendations if the data changes uh if the circumstances change so uh anyway this is all part of the work that we've got to do but to me this is a really important part of the work the Integrity behind our work in public health is not just about the issue we're taking on today it's about the trust that we need to rebuild uh in the field more broadly so if I understand correctly if you were to for instance uh put out a call that says look you know there are food additives that are allowed in the US that are not allowed in Europe that may be of risk we don't have enough data at present to say to avoid these things but here's a kind of a yellow zone you know you Green known to be safe red clearly known to be unsafe yellow we just don't know yet not enough data um so here's what my recommendation would be for my children yeah it's free country you know um there are people that argue it's not but at least at the level of which foods you want to buy with your own budget um it's it's a free country so you're saying that um you get messages that warnings about certain things could lead to push back but if I have to imagine that there's something and I'm not a conspiracy theorist but there has to be either the people that are saying look there could be problems are just friction averse they're just don't like anyone to be angry at anyone or um there there must be some incentive for things to remain quiet I mean I mean certainly the government has not had problems saying uh to do things or to not do things that had uh that upset companies or shut down companies or or elevated companies and their success so I I'm conf I'd like to know more about the back Contour of this well look I think and this is not too dissimilar for I think what happens in in other Industries but it's you know whenever you you do something in whether it's in the private sector or in government people we what what are the pros cons what's the push back I'm going to get how do I deal with that push back right uh and push back isn't always a bad thing right if you get push back from the public people hey that doesn't make sense to makees that's you should listen to that and and use it to inform your approach but that's the public whose your job is to serve I'm talking about push back from companies is is different right so when push back comes from people who have a financial interest uh in the product that you may be commenting on then you you've got to be you need to know about that number one so that you know how to how to mitigate it and while people may take different approaches to this my Approach as a public official as Surgeon General has been to say at the end of the day like I'm happy to to hear from anyone and in terms of their concerns or push back but at the end of the day what's going to guide my decisions about what we issues we take on what decisions we make and what we say to the public is going to be what is in driven by science in the public interest and if that means it's politically inconvenient that's okay if that means that you know something happens you know to my job that's okay too you know like we look the bottom line is life is short we don't know how much time we have here we may as well make the time we have count we as to do the things uh that are right and that are going to serve people that's my simple philosophy my parents taught me when I was growing up so that's the approach I I bring to this and that's why if we were to do let's say an initiative on diet I have no doubt that some of the things that we would say would be perturbing uh to folks who had a financial interest in the industry because I don't think that the current setup in the industry is serving the public well uh I I think we have made unhealthy Foods cheap that's a problem we've made healthy foods expensive that's a problem we put Health from a dietary perspective Out Of Reach for millions of Americans that is a fundamental problem and we've also disempowered people with by not giving them the information that they need to make decisions so even if you have resources I guarantee there are people listening to this podcast and many more people out there who go to the grocery store and just feel confused like what on Earth should I buy what's healthy what's okay anymore um it's just hard to know and so I think we've done a disservice by not doing more to help the public understand and access healthy foods and again it's why it's an issue that you know that that was on our list of issues that we would want to work on because I think that the public health need here is is immense I'd like to just take a brief break and thank one of our sponsors which is element element is an electrolyte drink that has everything you need and nothing you don't that means plenty of salt sodium magnesium and potassium the so-called electrolytes and no sugar now salt magnesium and potassium are critical to the function of all the cells in your body in particular to the function of your nerve cells also called neurons now people of course have varying levels of requirements for sodium so people with hypertension or prehypertension probably shouldn't increase their sodium however many people are surprised to find that by increasing their sodium intake they are able to function better cognitively and physically and that's because a lot of people especially people who are following low carbohydrate or even moderate carbohydrate and really clean diets often times they're excreting a lot of water and electrolytes along with it and simply by increasing their electrolyte intake using element they just feel better and function better I typically drink element first thing in the morning when I wake up in order to hydrate my body and make sure I have enough electrolytes and while I do any kind of physical training and certainly I drink element in my water when I'm in the sauna and after going in the sauna because that causes quite a lot of sweating if you'd like to try element you can go to drink element that's LM nt.com huberman to claim a free element sample pack with your purchase again that's drink element LM nt.com huberman I have a question about trust in big institutions and public health initiatives in general um the question is about masks um early in the pandemic as I recall we were told that masks were not necessary then we were told they are necessary and I think for a lot of people that flip in messaging um landed like a parent telling their teenage kid to always wear a seat belt but then you look into the front seat and Mom and Dad aren't wearing seat belts and as anyone who's been around teenagers there has been one you make that mistake once you're not making it again and you may never recover from that particular example in other words the public felt like there was a switch of messaging but what I don't recall happening was a like a hey we got that one wrong so sorry on us MH you know what the new data say blank what I recall was a message of don't and then do but there wasn't a lot of um kind of acknowledgment of of how challenging the situation was it was just a lot of top down mandates and in my opinion and this is just my opinion I think that led to a pretty rapid distrust of subsequent messages from which we still haven't really recovered um and so why do you think it's so challenging for public facing officials to just say look doing the best we can at the moment screwed up before changing the message now may change again we're navigating this in in real time it's Dynamic yeah please stay with us because you know goes without saying there's been a huge Chasm around this and related issues yeah look this it's an important question and look I I'm always I want to be thoughtful about um you know how I comment on what was done in the first year of the pandemic I was I was a citizen I was outside government and I don't know what was happening inside government in terms of the the decisions that were made made there but I do know sometimes from my experience in Ebola and in zika during those uh experiences we had as a country that in the you know in the fog of War when everything's coming at you sometimes it's hard to make the right decision all the time right so I I want to give some of those folks who were there uh you know in the first year of the pandemic you know some benefit of the doubt but I do think that the important thing uh the principle I I certainly try to follow but one I think that uh and you know we can all do better I Can Do Better certainly too uh but I think an important principle for us in public health communication has to be that we're clear that we're transparent about what we know and what we don't know uh and that we explain the why to people so if we're telling someone to do something why is it because there's a lot of data behind it is it because it's a sort of expert agreement best practice because sometimes as you know in in medicine sometimes when we don't have enough data to guide us on on a therapeutic approach but when the problem is imminent then sometimes experts will get together and put together expert inform formed guidelines to say okay look based on our best judgment and the limited data we have here's what we would recommend and as the data evolves we will change you know and and modify those recommendations we do that with hypertension right you evolve and update recommendations we do that with lipids um here too I think that has to be like a key part of the approach I think one of the challenges that I saw many public health officials encounter was even when they went out with Comprehensive messages like that uh which are hard to fit into a sound bite or into simple posts on social media um often a lot of that wasn't covered what gets covered is the Top Line you know this is what's being recommended that's what's being required Etc all the explanation is lost it's missing right and I think we also are living in a time where people are reading headlines like they're living busy lives right they're not necessarily you know always hearing all of the Nuance you know that's being explained um but I think that that's a challenge right is like I know many public officials struggled with how do you deliver nuanced information uh at a time when there isn't a clear black and white answer to things but I think the last piece around this is um I think something I was taught early in medical school is to approach your patients with humility recognizing that even though you have more training than they do uh you don't aren't living their life you don't necessarily know what they're going through and you shouldn't assume um things about them right and so approaching with humility means that um you've got to recognize that not everyone's going to be able to follow your guidance and if they aren't able to that doesn't mean you criticize them it also means recognizing that people may have ideas or suggestions for you that may actually improve your recommendations or how you communicate and so I these are the principles I think that are important in public communication but I think that both the challenge of translating nuanced arguments into what's actually covered that was tough for many public health officials I think the other thing honestly just on a human level that became hard for many of them and I I'm thinking particularly about local and state public health officials who are on the front lines that I talked to a lot was they ended up getting attacked a lot and abused a lot during the pandemic and I don't just mean like attacked online I mean people showing up at their houses people harassing their children uh people threatening their safety um and and this was often people who were upset about some of the requirements that were being put down from local Departments of health and you can understand Co was as stressful a time as we've seen recently people lost their jobs people were losing loved ones I mean talk about a stressful time but I think at a human level Public Health officials who were exposed to that kind of abuse and who started to worry about their children's safety um many of them stepped out of the arena and said is this really worth it to put my family at risk um and that was hard because we lost a lot of good Public Health people in that respect so I think I think in addition to having sort of these core principles of public health communication in place I think what we also need to restore is an environment where we of frankly of humility and civility where where we don't attack people you know who maybe have different views or are coming out with recommendations that um you know are not palatable uh to us and uh and I think it's also incumbent upon our leaders in society to not Stoke that kind of resentment and violence as well CU that happened during the pandemic as Co got increasingly politicized and you know while that may have been at times done for political reasons here or there the people who suffered were both the public health leaders who were trying to do the right thing for their communities and the public themselves who weren't able to have a clear direct channel uh to and a dialogue with their Public Health officials uh because a lot of that ended up getting closed off yeah I feel like there was a lot of talking down to the dissenters in the general public yeah uh and I totally agree that um you know getting violent or harassing people with whom you disagree is is totally inappropriate Andrew the one thing just to say about the humility piece and I'll give you an example here of where I think this could have and should have been done better is it an effort for example around masks uh to recommend that people wear masks and one important thing just to know is that when it comes to like schools requiring masks like those are decisions that are made on local levels right the federal government doesn't mandate masks in schools uh doesn't have the authority to do that so those are local local decisions but at the end of the day there were people who did not want their children to wear masks right for a variety of reasons uh some worried about their develop Social Development some worried that it was adding stress to their kids like people had met different reasons why they may or may not have wanted their children to wear masks and one of the things I think that was not helpful was that when there were parents who made the decision they didn't want their kids to wear masks um I think some of them received a lot of critic iism uh without people necessarily stopping to understand why they may have been making that decision because I'll say as a parent whose children were in school you know my kids are five and seven and um in the first year of the pandemic they were doing preschool virtually which was a nightmare it was incredibly hard for us even when they got back to school in the fall of 2021 um it was a really tough like adjustment for them and I could understand like some of the concerns that parents uh were having wondering about hey how are these precautions affecting my child's experience and Social Development so on the whole this the recommendation may still be uh Hey improve ventilation your classrooms recommend masking recommend testing Etc but those recommendations I think have to be made in a way that acknowledges like the humanity of people who are may have a different point of view or may make a different decision uh for their child and I know that when loc localities made the decision in many cases to require uh schools in their you know kids in their District to wear a mask that put some parents who didn't want that they put them in a hard place right and but I think that our failure to actually have an open honest respectful conversation about this where we didn't feel like we were uh each being attacked you know as parents for our decisions or as community members for the decisions we were making I think that not only hindered I think the response but I think it actually contributed to this division the sense of black and whiteness that hey it's us against them and then suddenly if I was against one measure then I was against all of them you know or if I was for one measure I was for all of them because we just started segregating into sites uh and this became a polarized uh you know experience at a time where really it should have been a crisis that brought us together as messy as it was um and that honestly Andrew is what I worry about most for the next pandemic right like I think we've learned a lot from this pandemic about uh how to manufacture vaccines and de and how to develop them quickly uh how to distribute them uh efficiently uh and you know we had one one was one of the I think most historic and and effective vaccine distribution efforts in this country even though certainly could have been better but it was historic by by all measures um we've learned a lot about how to do vaccines Therapeutics uh a lot of the nuts and bolts of a pandemic response well but I worry what we are still struggling with is how we build trust how we communicate with the public and how we stay together as a country in the face of adversity because if we're going to if we're divided the way we were during coid during the next pandemic or the next you know for a threat that may come from a foreign adversary that's a huge national security issue for us and so that that's what keeps me up at night when I think about the next pandemic that may come two questions relate to what you just said first of all um as it relates to vaccines in my opinion um and I think the opinion of many people out there that the response to the next pandemic um will be heavily contingent on at least some sort of acknowledgment that there are people who at least feel that there have been vaccine injuries right to Simply say um okay the previous time round with coid went this way and now there's now virus X right let's hope not God forbid but sounds like it's coming at some point and people are going to think to the last time and they're going to immediately say well the last time we were told to you know uh take a vaccine some people had a good experience with that other people didn't and it in this empathy model of acknowledging and you know you know letting your moral compass guide and understanding the why behind what people are are are doing and how they're reacting it seems to me that now would be the time to at least try and understand where they're coming from even if one disagrees maybe even especially if one disagrees and try and get people aligned now before the next pandemic it and um so what efforts are being made if any to try and acknowledge um that some people really do feel as if they were harmed I'm not saying if they were or not but clearly there are people who feel that they were people they know were harmed is there an effort to present them with data to have discussions with them to try and get people aligned so that the next time around uh we can be more of a unified front whatever the necessary response happens to be yeah no it's a really important question and and to me I always go back to sort of first principles from practicing medicine right which is if there is a medicine you give a patient and even if it helps 99.99% of patients but this one particular patient happen to be harmed by it you go in you acknowledge it you talk about it and you together TR out a path for how you want to move forward and the path forward might be yes let's get rid of that medication but let's use an alternative let's try it or we can't use that medication anymore here are the risks you may sustain but we'll find other ways to protect you right so that's what we would do in medicine right that's what I've done with patients over the years I think here too similarly when I think when it comes to tracking Adverse Events from vaccines this is an area where the CDC and the FDA track and collaborate uh and tracking means not just not only collecting reports from the public and from clinicians when they see uh an effect that may be related to a vaccine but it also involves analyzing those to see were they correlated or were there's actual causation there right because um you know if I if today for example uh I felt unwell uh and I trace back what happened yesterday and it turns out hey I ate this burrito that was out in the the Sun for way too long um the question is am I feeling sick because the burrito or did the burrito just happen to be you know a you know something that happened but it's independent of how I'm feeling um maybe it turns out somebody was actually sick uh with a GI bug you know around me and that's the reason uh that I'm feeling the way I am today so the analysis that needs to be done on cases that are reported uh is important and it's something that the CDC and the FDA do together now that analysis I think is essential to communicate clearly to the public um and whenever I engage with folks in the public which we do often and people will talk to me about their experiences with vaccines I do think it's important to acknowledge what people have gone through um like some people for example like when I got uh vaccinated for Co for example I I felt like I had mild flu like symptoms for a couple of days you know it wasn't great I would have preferred I didn't you know have those feelings like you know and uh then I felt better a couple of days later and then I moved on but you know I acknowledge it didn't feel good you know to to feel that way there are other people who may have had U experiences where they felt that they had more serious uh you know side effects and there may be a question was that related to the vaccine or not so I think we have to both hear and acknowledge those I certainly try to do that I know I think it's important to keep doing that across all of government but I also think it's important for us to to help people understand the process that we have to go through to understand whether those are related or not if you go online and the cdc's uh site where they collect a lot of this information and you just purely look at reports that are given of potential adverse effects that you can't sort of take that and say ah those are all related to the vaccine look at this rate of harm it's extraordinarily High because we don't actually do that with any other vaccine or medicine right sure we we start there we do the analysis and we try to understand what's actually related or not so I think that's that's what we've got to do here too one last thing I'll say is that it's important I think also for us to to help put this in context of other vaccines and medicines and interventions that we use so for example just take Tylenol for example like most people think oh well Tylenol it's safe there's nothing bad happens if you take Tylenol Etc but people who track the data know that Tylenol by and large is a generally speaking a safe medication but there are people who experience adverse effects from Tylenol liver damage you know and and other adverse effects uh and you know that data is available but what has happened in the case of that medication is that the risks and benefits are both analyzed and then a recommendation is put forward about a generally safe way to use it and then there's data put out about the the side effects common or rare right but I think sometimes we also forget that a lot of the medicines that we have come to take and just see as normal part of our life just like any other vaccine like there's some rate of rare side effects that will happen I say that because what I worry about in the black and white environment that we're living in is sometimes people will take an anecdote about a potential adverse effect and we'll portray that as the rule right and we'll say well look I know somebody who had this side effect so nobody should take this because this is what's going to happen to you if we did that nobody would ever take Tylenol no one would ever take Ibuprofen no one would take NyQuil like no one would take any of the common medications that we pick up at the drugstore and that we commonly use so uh that's how I think we have to approach this with a combination of of clear communication empathic listening and and data and cont text um again that doesn't fit neatly in a in a in a social media post per se but I think part of what we're we need to do as a country is rebuild the relationship honestly between the medical and public health establishment and the public and I think it's starts with this kind of communication uh the other question I had about the next pandemic and the one we just had is uh why not have Committees of people of diverse backgrounds socioeconomic diversity racial diversity uh every aspect of diversity rather than individuals standing there telling us what to do for several reasons one is um we are a country of many different people yeah I think we um there are dozens if not hundreds of scientific papers showing that patients follow the advice of doctors that look like them and sound like them or to whom they would aspire to be like yeah we know this and yet Public Health officials typically are unitary one person telling us do this don't do that this is a good idea that's a bad idea I I'm but one citizen but I'm putting up both hands both feet and all toes and saying that committees small but diverse committees that people can relate to and feel as if um the messages that they're getting are vetted through a common understanding yeah so it's a really good suggestion and and I could agree with you more that A diversity of voices is really important to to get a message out out and during Co actually that's one of the things that our office actually was was helping to build was something called the community core right where we actually we recognize so very clearly this is something I you know I came to see as a doctor sometimes I was the right person to message to a patient sometimes I wasn't right sometimes it was the nurse sometimes it was uh the medical student sometimes it was an administrator or the the social worker with different background different life experiences so part of this work is knowing when to step up when to step back right but the community Corp that we were building was a really diverse uh you know group of people um and a lot of them had Public Health backgrounds but a lot of them were Community leaders who understood Health even though they didn't have formal training um but they're people who knew their communities right and they had the trust of their communities and they understood what was going on they wanted to be helpful so we brought them together to say okay look here's what the science is telling us here the general recommendations um here's what we would provide uh you ask us any questions you have like if there's something we don't know we'll go back and look it up um but you're the leaders in your community they should be hearing from you you know about about these messages and then that those folks went out and actually we worked closely with them collaborated with them uh they would design the messages for their community based on what they thought made sense they weren't taking what we said word for word and we didn't want them to um but to me like that kind of diverse approach is what we need more of now you know I'll tell you what I would I would have liked I would have liked if more media networks put those folks on TV and got them on the radio right because it's important that many of them were showing up in their communities were knocking on doors were uh doing local you know podcasts Etc and that was great but I would have liked more of their faces I carried on TV right so that's a place where when when we talk to media and when I talk to folks in media one of the things I encourage them and push them to do also is to say look if you can take more of these diverse faces and voices and put them out there that's actually good for the community and it also helps people see that it's not like one or two people who are sort of pushing an agenda here this is like the Public Health Community is Big it's broad it's diverse it has a lot of voices and and as the more voices we can hear from as public I think the better off we are yeah here here I I you know again I genuinely hope and pray that we don't have another pandemic but if and when we do I hope there will be committees rather than individuals I know we you know this is a thing in this country we like the idea that one person's going to save the climate one person's going to save transportation one person you know the covers the person of the year type approach um but we but then we get frustrated when that person does things or makes decisions that we don't like in their public or personal life and then it all seems to fall into Division and I just feel like we not talking about groups of hundreds of people but small groups so I think we're aligned in that way yeah and and look there there's I think a notion that um I think sometimes we do want like the one person who can not only necessarily have all our trust and we can look to but also who we can hold accountable you know if something uh doesn't quite work out if we don't like something um and and while I get that sort of mentality I think that in this moment especially when we're trying to rebuild trust I think it's important for people to know that what they may be hearing in terms of medical or SC Public Health recommendations it's important for them to know how broad an audience that's coming from or broad a group of experts right and we there was a lot more broad agreement for example during coid and uh during Ebola during zika on Public Health recommendations but you wouldn't always know it if you turn on the TV because you were seeing the same couple of faces so I think we have to to certainly diversify that um one other thing I think I'll tell you that's important here is I think we have to also think about how we fund groups on the ground that are doing the the hard work of getting Public Health messages out because one of the things that those groups often would tell me and these are I might say the groups I'm I'm talking about the community organization that spent years in a neighborhood getting to know families where folks recognize them when they're walking down the street they're like oh yeah that's a person from organization X they understand us they get us they're looking out for us a lot of those organizations had spent their resources helping the community getting to know the community but they didn't have sophisticated mechanisms to apply for grants for example they didn't have grant writers who had done this a thousand times so historically those groups have a hard time getting support and funding so I'll tell you one interesting thing my my wife did which I certainly was very of is she was helping to to build an effort and to build a nonprofit organization with a couple of colleagues that organization of people who knew how to get money how to apply for Grants how to get Foundation support but who also had the wisdom to know that the most important they could do was to give portions of that money to groups on the ground so they saw themselves as an organization that channeled money to groups that had trust and they executed their their their mission that way and that was very effective and I think we need more of that when it comes to disseminating funding one thing I think many people may not uh may or may not appreciate is that when you it's actually hard from government to put out a lot of money uh at once and to do so quickly right um like when you've got a lot of funds that you need to get into communities what happens is the federal government often will give it to States states will then give it to local communities uh to like the local Department of Public Health part potentially and then they will look to distribute it to others that takes time but also means if you're not connected to that network if you don't know your local Department of Health or you're not connected to the State Department of Health sometimes it can be challenging to figure out how to get the money and so I think we need more operations like you know like what my wife and others have been building to try to get those funds directly to the folks who not you don't necessarily have the most fancy you know grant writing operation but they have their relationships because at the end of the day it's those relationships that create the trust it's a trust that allows in life-saving information to get to people and that's the link that's missing very interesting Pharma big Pharma I got a lot of questions about whether or not big Pharma is on the take for every Public Health Initiative now as uh somebody who understands a bit about and certainly believes in the use of certain prescription medications I find most um questions about quote unquote big Pharma to overlook fact that there are thousands if not hundreds of thousands of medications that save lives and enrich people's lives that are prescription drugs um I also believe my audience knows I say it over and over again that Better Living Through Chemistry still requires Better Living we still have to get our sunlight get our sleep social connection good nutrition exercise and all those things there's just no pill that's going to replace those yeah okay but I think it's a valid question that people are asking is there a direct relationship between between big Pharma and public health initiatives in a way that should have us concerned about the messaging that we're getting and at times and the fact that the United States consumes the vast majority of drugs for mental health for instance as compared to other countries so that's one question and then um I want to dovetail into that question what are your thoughts on the fact that you know there's a history of say the tobacco industry being you know uh very uh interdigitated shall we say with um government policies in ways that had us basically injure if not kill millions of Americans and then eventually say you can't smoke on near a hospital you can't smoke anywhere there's very few places where you can consume tobacco products you know that that kind of um relationship and financial incentives and then a lot of backpedaling later um I think wore on people's um trust MH so how should we frame the relationship between the pharmaceutical industry government and public health initiatives in a way that is you know at least halfway functional it look I I understand where the concern and suspicion comes from right and look I I think it's important that public health initiatives and medical advice is independent of the influence of industries that may seek to profit uh from what's being recommended or from medications that are being prescribed and we look we have a history in medicine right of doctors who were you know given gifts and vacations and all kinds of fancy things by Pharma companies in an effort to influence what they prescribed that was really problematic and now we're seeing a lot less of that which is good a lot of rules are being put in place by medical societies and professional societies and by academic institutions to say this is an unacceptable way to practice and that's really important because I do think that human psychology is that sometimes we underestimate how much we're influenced by incentives we think ah yeah I'm getting that but I know how to make independent decisions but at the end of the day we're human and and we influenced or it's a great drug it could be wow this is a drug that's really helping my patients I'm happy to recommend it to them yeah so the this so I want to separate one thing though like taking money from Pharma companies as a physician I think is highly problematic right I think it's hard to say that it doesn't influence practice maybe it doesn't for some people but it's just it's really hard to know who those people are um I do think that separate from that you can be a physician who prescribes medications because you believe they work look as a doctor I have prescribed many antibiotics during cases of infection that have helped my patients and I would prescribe those again I am glad that those exist um in many cases they've saved the lives you know of patients I was caring for in the hospital so that's what what should drive us is is does the data show that they work and does our patient need them right that's what should drive our decisions when it comes to Public Health recommendations here too I think a similar principle holds which is that I don't think that Pharma money uh should be influencing our Public Health decisions which means that it shouldn't be funding our public health organizations that are making recommendations certainly I'll you know I know this is obvious to you but I'll say just to be clear for everyone who's listening like our office uh doesn't take any money from industry not just Pharma industry from any industry like our the money that we get is allocated by Congress at the end of the day it's taxpayer money and that's all we get and and that's important we don't want money from the you know from pharmaceutical companies um but that's important because people need to know that these decisions are not being made for for financial gain um with that being said I there's a broader concern I have Andrew which is I think that we have become a pill for every problem Society where we look for a quick fix of a medicine for every challenge uh that we may incur and sometimes yes I'm I'm a believer that if science you know helps us create uh medications that can help solve disease we should use them appropriately but I think we discount heavily the behavioral changes that we need to make the more broader societal and environmental changes that we need to make that influence our health like our food environment matters for our health our decisions about how Physically Active we are matter for our health whether or not we sleep matters for our health and all of these impact our mental health and well-being as well and so I I when when I think about the that bias that that to me is not always you know stemming from money that came from a pharmaceutical company although I think it the ads that we see all the time uh from Pharma companies I think try to convince us that hey just take this pill once a day and all your problems will go away but I think it's more complex than that and and I think that even for you know in the health care setting like if you're uh if you're seeing a patient who has pain uh who's having intense pain it feels easier sometimes to prescribe a medication for that pain rather than trying to to deal with non-medication based you know approaches or try to get the deeper origins of the pain I'm not saying that's what doctors do all the time but I'm saying that we're living in an environment and a broader culture where we I think increase ly reach for something that we see as a quick immediate fix uh and again don't blame people for that we rather take a quick fix over something that's going to take a long time but I think it is selling us I think sometimes a false hope which is that that's all we need to solve our problems and I think a lot of times you need more you need the behavioral changes you need the environmental changes um that's one of my big concerns in terms of how we communicate about health would a potential solution be this idea of small committees so let's say uh somebody is experiencing chronic pain localized or general that they would go to their general practitioner but in the room would also be somebody who understands sematic medicine uh a trained clinical psychologists who understand sematics that the body and the brain are linked through the nervous system um and could also assess um you know possible psychological Roots uh of the issue and then somebody in the room who can make um Behavior nutritional um maybe even supplementation based safe supplementation based recommendations and then the physician who can say you know and in addition to that I think the person should have on hand you know a 5 milligram dosage of a prescription drug that if they need it they could take and I think it would provide a lot of protections against you know uh potential adverse effects of any one of those things in isolation um there are great Protections in having people meet in groups um for lots of reasons and the person would feel very well cared for um so again small Committees of people with diverse expertise pooling together to treat people from a for lack of a better word a more holistic perspective why not I mean you're describing the dream I think that's exactly what we need interdisciplinary teams that can provide integrative care recognizing that in this day and age there's not one person who has all the expertise to help us figure out how to best manage our health challenges um I think what we have not figured out are a couple of things number one who are all the right people who need to be in the room uh or the sort of virtual room if you will the second is how do we create a a structure a Health Care System where that can actually happen with efficiency where it can be reimbursed appropriately but that's what we should be doing and then the Third Leg of that is the the group experience for patients right and there's increasingly in more clinics and healthc Care Systems around the country that are working on creating group experiences where patients who all let's say are working on diabet on their diabetes uh come together let's say once a week and they meet uh with the healthcare practitioner that might be an addition to their individual appointments but there is so much power in groups coming together uh groups of patients who can find Community who can help each other learn from each other's experiences uh that's highly underutilized right now in medicine um but to really do this well Andrew I think means that we have to we have to pull back from the model we have had for years in medicine which has been a very a highly individual type model which says okay you go to your doctor you see your doctor oneon-one you get everything you need maybe you need to go see a specialist okay then you wait a few weeks get another appointment Drive 30 miles go see somebody else maybe they're connected to the electronic health system maybe they're not maybe they know what was discussed maybe they they don't maybe they'll call and talk to their primary care doctor but maybe they won't because they're too busy and then you as a patient are stuck trying to piece all this together while often in pain well yeah in in physical and emotional anguish I'm not referring to my own experience although I've had you know mild examples compared to what other people have dealt with but you know people with chronic pain are irritable for understandable reasons I mean it it it's or maybe somebody's close veering towards suicidal depression then there's the interpersonal effects I mean I feel like the the crisis is is one of a lack of efficiency and thoroughness and um and again I'm not throwing stones at the medical profession I I like you believe that it's a collection of mostly um well-meaning people trying to do their best but the specialist model and the referral model is incredibly cumbersome it really is cumbersome and and like you look I having worked with many medical professions over the years like these are colleagues who I deeply admire I mean like they're there for the right reasons they want to help people alleviate suffering but they too are feeling burned out and frustrated by the inefficiencies of the system because I'll tell you one of the greatest contributors to burnout for doctors and nurses is a lack of self-efficacy it's seeing a patient who has a problem in front of you and feeling like you can't get them the help uh that they need that is a the greatest paper cut if you will uh to the sort of spirit of clinicians and many find themselves in that circumstance where they either find that they know what's needed but the system is throwing up prior authorizations or other insurance hurdles and prev their patient from getting that care or they are kind of at the edge of their expertise right this happens to pediatricians and primary care doctors more broadly all the time with mental health right most of the mental health care that's delivered in this country is delivered in primary care offices right now Primary Care offers didn't necessarily train specifically and only in mental health yet they find themselves having to manage a lot of that including increasingly complex substance use disorders uh and you treatment resistant depression and they need help figuring that out but if you don't have a lot of resources to get that referral to collaborate with the mental health professionals then you're stuck on your own figuring that out and so you look I think the pain is being experienced mostly by patients and but also very much so by clinicians and that's why that overhaul is needed and I I think look a lot of this is you know I'm not a healthcare Economist per se but I will say that a lot of this I think is tied into the business model that we built around medicine uh the notion that um you know we're paying individual people for IND idual services and individual procedures that are done uh while that has some Merit in some cases what we really care about is that the person is getting efficient integrated multi-disciplinary care overall and so when health systems for example come together and say okay rather than um sort of focusing on the amount I'm getting reimbursed for every procedure we're going to take more of a value based approach here where we say okay we've got a certain amount of money to care for certain people what's the most efficient way for us to provide them care recognizing if we don't do that it's not only bad for them but our costs in the long term will go up because we're not getting reimbursed for every procedure we're getting reimbursed for the the care overall care that we're taking for a patient so there are more of these value-based models that are are being adopted uh certainly in 2010 when the Affordable Care Act was passed and when uh other measures were taken in the Obama Administration in Medicare like that really pushed value based payment models forward um and again they're not perfect they've got they need their own tweaks but I don't think that the existing Financial structure that we had in medicine was serving Us in terms of delivering the kind of multi-disciplinary integrated efficient care that we increasingly need tough problem but through recognition of tough problems comes good Solutions that's my belief I'm an optimist at the end of the day you mentioned mental health uh lately you've been increasingly vocal about the crisis of isolation just one second Andrew before we go there just one thing I about the tough problems right you're exactly right and the problem is the longer we take to acknowledge and address these tough problems the more entrenched the interests become that profit from the status quo right so if you look at um the private insurance industry uh right now there are so many challenges we have right now with patients and clinicians saying that they know what care is needed but it gets denied they know what care is needed but prior authorizations you know get grown up there and required uh even for a medicine that clearly your patient needs urgently you know I've had the experience myself of having a family member who's needed a medication for an urgent situation and then being told that the pharmacy will not fill it because it requires a prior authorization but that can't be processed uh until the weekend is over because no one's in the office to approve the prior authorization and you're thinking to yourself does this make any sense like this is an urgent situation my family member needs his medication I've also had the experience as a doctor of fighting for my patients who have been denied Care by an insurance company being on the phone saying I'm sitting here in front of my patient I know that they are sick I know they can't go home I know they need to be in rehab there's nobody literally to help them at home but then not having like the the rehab bed approved by somebody who's not even there right and there's also just a a practice that we've seen time and time again where insurance companies will also just burden clinicians with more and more requests for information before they will agree to reimburse for services that have already been delivered for a patient who needs them which is just creating more and more barriers hoping that if you're a small time doc out there who's got you know your shingle that you put up you don't have a lot of resources how are you going to keep fighting all of this and sending more and more paperwork and So eventually you'll just give up um we have a lot of problems right there in an industry that should be delivering care often is doing good things but too often I think is allowing barriers to be put up uh to the care that's needed and this is particularly true with mental health I know we're going to talk about that but Mental Health Care is just been such a difficult thing for people to get in our country and part of the reason there are many reasons but one of them is that insurance companies historically did not reimburse adequately or in the same level for mental health care as they did for physical healthare or if they did they would only reimbursed for a limited number of sessions that you could have uh but how if if you're a mom out there who sees her child struggling uh with depression you're really worried um you don't want to be told you know what uh you can only get three sessions that's it what are you supposed to do after three sessions right uh and so what has happened is that even though in 2008 there was a law p called the addiction uh equity and mental health parity law even though that was passed to try to close that Gap there were many ways that insurance companies were skirting it right so one the law wasn't even being adequately were enforced for many years but two insurance companies sometimes would say okay you know we're reimbursing adequately but when you look in the network they had very few provider so you really couldn't access somebody right so that was a problem for patients and then the other challenge is that they would say okay you can see somebody but you've got to complete this prior authorization have that completed by your primary care doctor Etc again throwing up more and more barriers so very recently in fact just a few weeks ago um President Biden just announced that we are from as an Administration putting out a proposed rule to actually strengthen uh the mental health parody law to prevent some of these what I think of as abusive practices because they're preventing people who need care from getting it and if you've ever been as I know many people have been who are listening to this if you've ever been in a situation where you or somebody you love has struggled with a mental health concern what you need in that circum cumstance is help you don't need to be filling out paperwork you don't need to be waiting 3 months to actually get care you don't need to show up and be told only you only have two more appointments you need to know that help is there when you need it and a lot of these uh denials are are being issued to people who have done their their part of the bargain they' paid their premiums they've held up their end of the bargain and Care should be there for them when they need it so anyway this is something that upsets me a lot because I just I have seen too many patients over the years struggle without the care that they deserve and should get because the barriers that are being thrown up uh by industry but I say all that just to say that when you take on big problems you will run up against entrenched interests and that's a fight we have to take on we can't shy away from it we can't say you know this is politically too difficult like one of the things I'm very proud of is that we're finally negotiating on drug prices through the Medicare program something that should have been done decades ago but it's finally happening now um you know the administration just decided this has got to happen it was passed by Congress this is good uh and it just it makes no sense that we would pay more than we need to and pass the cost on to taxpayers uh when we can negotiate and we got to get look you got to if you're collecting taxes as Government you should be doing your best to make sure every one of those dollars is being spent well right cuz somebody took money out of their paycheck uh didn't use it for their family didn't use it for their kids and they gave to the government for good reason because that supports First Responders police officers a whole bunch of services that we need but the responsibil in government is to make sure that money is being used well and to pay more for medications than we should makes no sense at all especially for patients and taxpayers so clearly some steps in the right direction are occurring while on the topic of mental health um let's talk about the isolation crisis um what is the isolation crisis what aspects of mental and physical health is is it impacting and then um perhaps most importantly what can we each and all do about it mhm well this is one of those issues that I if you had told me Andrew 10 years ago hey you and I are going to be sitting here talking about loneliness and isolation I would have said I don't think so but I was really educated by people I met across the country about the fact that this was a real problem and the truth is it was familiar to me because of my own personal experiences you know as as a child I struggled a lot with a sense of loneliness and isolation I was really shy as a kid I was pretty introverted and I wanted to to make friends and hang out with other kids but it took me a while to actually build those relationships so um I spent a lot of time feeling left out you know there were times when I I I I would like when in elementary school and there were days where I pretended I had a stomach ache and so that my mom wouldn't make me go to school and it wasn't cuz I was scared of a test or a teacher cuz I didn't want to like walk into the cafeteria one more time and be scared that there was nobody to sit next to or that no one would want me to uh to be at their bench um I as I know what it feels like and I also know what the shame is like because I never told my parents about this well I never told anyone about that um because even though I knew my parents loved me I just felt like hey if I'm feeling this lonely it means something's wrong with me I'm not likable I'm not lovable I'm something's got to be it's got to be my fault in some way it was only years later Andrew when I talked to friends from grade school that I realized that a lot of them were feeling the same thing we were all struggling by ourselves uh no one really knew it and I came to see a lot of this as a doctor when I was taking care of patients and I never took a class on loneliness in medical school it wasn't part of our residency curriculum yet when I showed up in the hospital I found that the patient who had come in with a diabetic wound infection or who had come in um you know because they had had a heart attack when I sat down and talked to them often in the background they would talk about how lonely they were sometimes I would ask them hey you know I need to have a difficult conversation about uh your diagnosis is there somebody you'd want me to call to be with you during this time and too often the answer was you know I wish there was but there's nobody I'll just have the conversation by myself so but it was when I was Surgeon General I realized that those experiences weren't limited to me and my patients but they were incredibly common and two things I learned when I dug into the data Andrew was number one that loneliness is exceedingly common with one in two adults in America reporting measurable levels of loneliness but the numbers are actually even higher among young adults and adolescents the numbers and among uh youth actually depending on the surveys you look at are between 70 to 80% uh who say that they are struggling with loneliness so that's the first thing that I learned but the second thing was how consequential loneliness was I used to think loneliness was just a bad feeling what I came to see in digging into the scientific lit literature was that feeling socially disconnected being lonely and isolated was actually associated with increased risk of depression anxiety suicide but also an increased risk of cardiovascular disease of dementia and these are not small risks we're talking about 29% increase in the risk of coronary heart disease 31% risk and the increased risk of stroke 50% increased risk of dementia among older people increased risk of premature death and the mortality impact of of loneliness by the way and loneliness and isolation uh is comparable uh you know to the mortality impact of many other illnesses in fact it's even greater than the mortality impact we see associated with obesity which is something we clearly recognize as a public health issue so you put all this together and for me one of the key takeaways is that loneliness and isolation are critical public health challenges that are hiding behind the curtain behind this wall of stigma and shame and unless we talk about it and address it unless we reconcile what's been happening to us over the last 50 years where fewer and fewer people are participating in community organizations where more and more people are feeling isolated then we're not going to be able to repair the fraying foundations of society which are grounded fundamentally in our connection to one another you mentioned Community organizations um could you elaborate on uh you know growing up in the 70s and 80s I was exposed to like Community soccer teams swim team there was a community pool these were all public uh things uh there were um churches synagogues and mosques are we not seeing as much participation in those those types of organizations anymore and what other types of organizations are are out there that um you know come to mind when you think about the isolation crisis yeah so there there are several factors that have led to us being as isolated as we are one of them as you mentioned is the decline in participation in community organizations and this isn't a recent phenomenon this has been happening over the last half century in America we've seen lower participation in faith organizations in recreational leagues in service organizations and other community groups that used to bring us together and I think you know we can talk about the reasons why that has been the case U but one of the key consequences of that is that people don't have places where they can come together and get to know one another especially across differences so we actually associate more and more with people who are like us but this has also been fueled by a few other factors uh that are going on at the same time one is that just from a cultural perspective as modernity has arrived not just in the US but in other other countries we've seen that people are more mobile right they move around more we don't always stay in the community that we grew up in uh we tend to even if we move somewhere else for a school we may go somewhere else for a job we may change jobs and move somewhere else we are leaving behind communities that we grew up with that we went to school with that we worked with and I'm not saying that's all a bad thing right we're having more opportunities and that's a really good thing but I think one thing that we have not accounted for is the cost of these changes right if we know what the costs are of certain actions we may still take those actions but we may find ways to mitigate the the costs we may in this case invest more in our relationships be more conscious about reaching out to other people going to visit at them uh but that has been a a quiet but but devastating Consequence the other piece with modernity is that we have more convenience in our life which means that we also don't need to see other people to get certain things done like buying groceries or mailing an item out or getting something from the store I can sit in the comfort of my home and have everything just come to me now on the one hand that's incredibly efficient right but I think efficiency is an interesting thing because it's only one factor we should be considering in our lives there too we have to ask the cost and one interesting thing about Co is many people in the first year of Co when we were all separated from one another you know when we finally came back together again I had so many people who said to me you know what I expected to miss my parents and my siblings and my friends not being able to see them what I didn't expect was missing the strangers that I saw at the coffee shop or the folks who I ran into the grocery store or seeing neighbors as I walked down the street like I actually missed that more than I thought I would so we have lost out on some of those interactions and those loose ties but the final thing to keep in mind also is about what is happening with how we are using social media technology which I think is fundamentally transformed how we interact with one another and how we see ourselves and each other and this is particularly true for young people uh who are growing up as digital natives but what has happened there I worry is that and and it's not that social media is all bad just to be clear you know technology look I'm I'm a believer that in technology broadly speaking you know I'm a user of technology I spent seven years building a tech company I'm a Believer in Tech but I think whether technology helps or hurts us is about how it's designed and ultimately about how it ends up being used and what we've seen with social media as well is that uh for many people it ended up leading to in-person connections being replaced with online connections um we came to somehow value and um almost seek out more and more followers and friends on social media feeling like somehow that made us more connected but the nature of dialogue also changed like as human beings we evolved over thousands of years to not just understand the words someone is saying but to hear the tone of their voice to see their facial expression like you and I are sitting across and and we're both processing like our body language right and I'm seeing you nod your head and I'm seeing your eyes focused like all of that matters to how we communicate um but also like you and I are less likely to say something hurtful right now to one another because we can see each other if I said something to hurtful to you like i' probably see the the pain or consternation on your face and that might give me pause right when you're communicating online with other people without any of that information or with any of the uh sort of barriers if you will that make you pause before you hurt someone it leads to a very different kind of communication uh one that can be quite hurtful at times and I also think that one thing people many people don't recognize is that to communicate with somebody else and reach out and build a relationship with someone it actually takes a certain amount of self-esteem to do that you have to believe the other person's going to want to hang out with you they're going to see something valuable in you and for many young people what has happened uh and I think frankly for many older people too is their experience on social media has shredded their self-esteem as they constantly comparing themselves to other people like when you and I were growing up uh you know in the ' 80s we we compared ourselves to other people too right people have from Millennia but what's fundamentally different now is that in a given day you can compare yourself to thousands of images that you see online that's actually literally what people young people tell me I do roundtables with college students and high school students all the time around the country and the three things they tell me most consistently about their experience of social media is it makes them feel worse about themselves worse about their friendships but they can't get off it because the platforms are designed to maximize the amount of time they spend on them so you put all of this together and I think what has happened is that we're talking more but we understand each other less we have a lot of information but we're lacking in the wisdom that comes from Human Relationships uh and I think that that's really hurt us you know we see it certainly in the data that tells us about mental and physical health outcomes but there's also the human suffering component Andrew like it's really heartbreaking for me to travel around the country to hear hear from people of all ages often in quiet whispers about their struggles with isolation about how they feel like they just don't matter at all about how they feel like they just don't have a place where they belong and it's these are people on the outside look perfectly fine right they're posting happy things online to Folks at work they're seeming like everything's going great this is why I always tell people like you loneliness is a great masquerader it can look like withdrawal and sadness it can look like anger and irritability it can look like aloofness as well and so it's only when we stop to ask someone how they're doing when we take pause for a moment to maybe reflect on what's happening in their life that we realize that wow the majority of people in our country are actually struggling with loneliness yeah I'm a firm believer that our nervous system evolved under conditions of close interpersonal and direct connection and um to suddenly throw a technology in front of ourselves that deprives our nervous system of its normal development is it's clearly going to lead bad places it's also um clear to me as based on what you just described that you know when we go on social media we see something but they don't really see us you know hence perhaps why people get um aggressive in the comment section um you know they they want to be heard yeah um we want to be seen I think all of us want to be seen and see other people yeah and uh social media doesn't allow for it so easily um I also so know that a lot of young people will congregate with their friends to play video games online but that's different you're you're essentially showing up as an avatar MH and when you when we were kids we also played different characters in our in our games um but oh so different now um do you think that there will be a youth Rebellion movement against um these kinds of Technologies I mean there's a long history of of young people rebelling against the the stuff that's been put in front of them and they're like nope no more we're going to Rebel in fact that was the way that youth overcame the um the nicotine e epidemic if you recall it was the advertising pitching them against or pitting them excuse me against um wealthy cackling older men in chair in rooms counting their money that was what actually was successful in getting kids to not smoke because kids have a rebellious streak as opposed to when they were told hey smoking is terrible for you your lungs are going to fill with cancer kids didn't stop smoking teens stop smoking it was you know Rebellion has been um baked into our nervous system uh in the Adolescent and teen years so do you see a rebellion against this um social isolation our kids going to start putting away their phones and hanging out together again and that's going to rescue us and that's a way of saying what can we do for them what can they do for themselves and what can we do as adults because there are a lot of um the silent suffering is the thing I also really worry about yeah so it's a good question and I think there is already uh a movement that's building among young people to create distance between them themselves and their devices and particularly social media and it it's it's cropping up in different ways I'm meeting more and more some of these are organized efforts but I'm also meeting more uh families uh where the parents and kids together have decided that they're going to delay using social media and you know till past middle school or in some cases even later or where they're deciding that they're going to draw boundaries around social media use or they're going to replace their smartphone with a dumb phone that allows them to do things like text and make phone calls and use maps and and all that stuff but doesn't necessarily have social media apps on it now this is still a small minority and and we're dealing with a bit of a network effect here right because if you're the only one who's not on social media uh in your middle school class then you might feel left out which is why it's so important for parents to and and kids actually do this together but I do think that to use your analogy with smoking that one thing that I I think many young people bristle against is this notion of being manipulated and used for the profit you know of a social media platform and the reality is that the again we've talked about how the fundamental business model is for most social media platforms is built on how much time you spend on those platforms that translates to ad revenue and that translates to the bottom line whereas what I care about as a parent as search in general is about how well that time is being spent is it actually contributing to the health and well-being of a young person or or is it not is it actually harming them and this is where I think when I go out and talk to young people about this number one I'm so impressed by a lot of young people because they they already have a lot of these insights they're the ones living it right they're not thinking that this is all you know perfect and and it's all a pure benefit here they're the ones telling me that it makes them feel worse about themselves and and their friendships but they also having a hard time getting off of it uh because again of how these platforms are designed so about a third of adolescence are saying that they're staying up till midnight or later on week nights using their devices and a lot of that is social media use and this takes away from sleep which we know and you know better than anyone is so critical to the mental health and well-being of all of us but of young people in particular who are at a critical phase uh you know of development um the other thing that is very concerning to me is nearly half of adolescents say that using social media has made them feel worse about their body image as they're constantly comparing themselves to others online and we used to think that this is just girls who are experiencing this and yes it is uh a lot of young girls who are experiencing these body image issues but now it's increasingly uh boys as well so this is happening across the board but the other piece I think that concerns me thinking about mental health symptoms is that you look at how much time uh kids are using social media on average adolescent are using it for three and a half hours a day on average so just social media just social media and that means many you're using it for far more than that and what you're finding though is that for adolescence who use it 3 hours or more in a given day their risk of anxiety or depression symptoms double right so and if they average uses three and a half days that means that millions of kids all across our country the majority of our kids are are at risk here and so you know you put all this together and and it paints a very concerning picture whatever benefits there may be for some kids of using social media and there's some and we lay out some of this in our advisory on social media some kids find social media is a great way to express themselves to reach other people to find support especially if they're from a community that doesn't have a lot of folks who like them around uh it can be really reassuring to connect with others but we can't say that just you know that to get those benefits we have to subject our children to all of these other harms right like kids are experiencing exposure to harmful content to harassment and bullying online six out of 10 uh adolescent girls are saying they've been approached by strangers on social media and ways that made them feel very uncomfortable um our kids are also finding that Health promoting activities in their lives are being cannibalized by their use of social media that it's detracting from time for Sleep inperson interaction physical activity and the erosion of self-esteem really concerns me as well because you know you need that not just for social interaction but like look as a as a father I want my children to grow up being confident about who they are being confident enough to be authentic as they up in the world to not feel like they need to create some brand that's different from who they fundamentally are just to sell that to the world I want them to know who they are and to be comfortable being who they are and to encourage other people to do the same to support them in their efforts to be authentic that's what I want my kids to do that's not what's happening to a lot of kids on social media so I think we not only need more kids to understand this and to support them in their efforts to create space and sacred spaces away from social media but we need to support parents here too cuz Andrew my big concern with parents is look we've taken this technology which is rapidly evolving which we didn't grow up with as kids and we've told parents you manage it all on your own we put the entire burden on parents and kids to manage this um you know when we were growing up you remember the motor vehicle fatalities were really high uh in America and we didn't say okay you know what that's just the price of Modern Life we just have to accept it and keep moving on with our lives we said hold on we don't have to go back to horses and Buggies but we also don't need to accept this death rate we need to make this experience safer and so we put in place with the advocacy and support of incredible groups like Matt and others across the country that me Mothers Against Drunk Driving ultimately the government put in place safety standards that got us seat belts airbags crash testing to make sure the frame of cars were robust in the setting of an accident and that help helped us reduce motor vehicle accidents and deaths and that's what we need here too like we need to have the backs of parents and kids and that means from a policy perspective putting in place safety standards to protect kids from exposure to harmful content from from the experience of bullying and harassment and that also protect them from features that would seek to manipulate them into excessive use uh which is happening far too often right now we also need a policy that requires data transparency from the company you know researchers tell us all the time that they these are independent researchers they tell us they are having a hard time getting full access to the data from the social media platforms about the full impact of the platforms on the mental health of kids and as a parent look I I don't when we bought car seats for my children when when they were born we looked up the safety data like many parents we wanted to make sure the car seats were safe but if you had told me that hey you know the manufacturers of these car seats are actually not disclosing some of the the data on the impact on children uh but go ahead and buy it anyway you know I'm sure other people are buying these car seats you should be fine I would have been very disturbed by that right no parent wants to feel that information is being hidden from them about the health impact of products on their kids that's what we have right now so this is a place where I think while yes uh and we we'll we should we'll talk about some steps parents can take because I want to get to practical steps of people who are here as parents or people have kids in their lives can take but we we we need policy makers to step up and step into the void here and to fill the Gap because this is too much again to just ask parents to manage entirely on their own and this isn't again about telling parents what to do and restricting them this is about giving them the support they need so they have confidence uh when they see uh you know a technology out there a device out there a product out there for kids that they know it's been tested that it's been studied and that it's actually safe for their children my understanding is that in uh countries like China there are limit as to how many hours kids can be on screens period And when I was a kid we were allowed to watch TV for a certain number of I think it was a half an hour or an hour my mom was constantly kicking us out of the house like literally you got to leave the house you got to go down the street and play un fortunately I liked outdoor activities um nowadays we also have the issue that a lot of parents are on their phones at soccer games and at kids events and so the kids are modeling their parents yeah um parents are distracted as well so there's a lack of social connection people even an immediate family people are screened in um you know TV there's laptops there's multiple phones iPads people are you more engaged in the screen portals than often than their own portals you go to a concert and people are watching the concert through their screen so that they can send the same image that everyone around them is sending out to the world if you think about it's kind of crazy um but I guess they want to capture that unique experience but uh it's not unique at all that's the that's the myth that's the illusion there's nothing unique about the your post of something that you went to go see what would be truly unique is to just experience that in real time right it's so wild to think about like what we think of as our unique portal is actually not unique at all it's what we do with it learn on my my stance is glean and learn information online then go use it in real life come back from time to time you know maybe an hour a day maximum or so can I just underscore the two words you said real life because that I think is a really important key here which is that all of real life isn't happening on social media there's a whole world out there which I think is real life which is happening offline and what's happening online too often is distorted right it's giving us like like even just take um you know just take the images that that we see of people their uh you know their summer beach images their like great vacation images that's not representative of their entire life of how they're living their life but we see that we see people's anger we and their vital and we come to believe over time that that's how people feel that's what people are dealing with and experiencing their life and and we've just got to get you your mom I love what your mom did getting you guys outside um my parents did the same thing too like we I was very blessed to have two parents who didn't come you know they didn't have a lot of resources growing up they didn't come to this country with a lot of resources but the one of the greatest gifts they G gave us is that they loved us uncondition Al the other great gift that they gave us is they pushed us to just explore to meet people to learn about the world uh they wanted us outside playing you know experimenting just discovering the world you know riding our bike around the neighborhood and and that's what we did but right now two critical things that kids need for their mental health and development or two important forces I should say that are impacting their mental health and development one is social media but the second also is the lack of unstructured plate time uh that kids have like unstructured playtime is time when we as kids learn how to negotiate situations with other kids how to resolve conflict how to recognize what's going on in someone else's you know eyes before they say something we learn how to collaborate and play with other kids this a lot you learn on the playground as it turns out but I worry that right now that we've almost somehow made that kind of unstructured time seem inefficient you know we've set these standards uh for our kids that they need to be uh you know getting fancy jobs and into fancy colleges and making an x amount of money and the path to doing that is you know to be enrolled in X number of activities after school and to do all this stuff in school and their lives are so hyper structured um that I worry that the time to just play to be creative to reflect and think to just have unstructured time with other kids has evaporated and I think that that also is hurting the mental health and wellbeing of our children I love the idea that that unstructured play time could be framed in the accurate context of the nervous system developing the way it was supposed to develop I mean I would argue that um success is going to be easiest for children that engage in the real world more in fact there's great risk to posting everything that you do online we've seen some examples of that preventing people from getting into or staying in college based on things they said or did previously that they shouldn't have said or done um that's those are kind of you know negative highlighted cases but in general um we know that the the nervous system thrives on diversity of types of interactions and social interactions in particular I'm just restating what you just said so if ever there was a call for kids to get out into non-screen life let's call it um and engage uh their nervous system that way it without question is going to benefit them in terms of their ability to learn and retain information perform well in school which is not everything life's about but let's face it we still live in a society where hitting those milestones on a consistent basis are the best is the best predictor of people being able to you know live self-sustained lives build families and that sort of thing so um you mentioned a few actionable M uh items for parents as it relates to kids maybe well not maybe limits their screen time force them outside in the safe weather and safe conditions of course but uh what about adults as well I what what can we all do um should we be restricting our screen time to X number of hours per today I mean you're the Surgeon General if you had a magic wand which I realize you don't um and you could make a uh a highly informed recommendation about what the thresholds for too much uh time on social media are um what would it be two hours three hours yeah it's it's a good question and let me actually go through some of these things that parents can can do for kids and that we can all do for ourselves with kids in particular um what I would do specifically with social media is and this is this is frankly what I'm planning to do with my wife for our kids as they grow up number one I would seek to delay the use of social media past Middle School uh at at minimum and I know that that is hard to do at a time where all kids are on social media and you don't want your child to be the only one left out and to be lonely as a result so that means no account of their own means no account of their own okay and I would make see to the best of your ability see if there are other parents that you can partner with to do this because it's hard to do alone as a parent but it's also if there are other parents you're partnering with that means there other kids who are also delaying you so that means your child is not alone and I think if you start the conversation with other parents you'll realize a lot of them are worried about the same things you are they may have thought about delaying you but they also don't want their kid to be the only one so this becomes a numbers challenge but partnership can help us if your child's already on social media what I'd recommend is to create sacred spaces in their lives that are technology free and specifically I would think about the hour before bedtime and throughout the night as time that you want to protect because kids are losing not just sleep because they're going to sleep later because they're on their devices but they're also waking up in the middle of the night maybe to use a bathroom maybe to get some water and then they get back on their devices again so the quality of their sleep is being significantly impacted by access to those devices during the night so I would protect that time hour before bed throughout the night I would also create make sure meal times uh were Tech free zone so that people actually that you talk to one another you see one another and time with friends and family members when you're out you know at a birthday party Etc make that Tech free time let them focus on their time with other people those three Tech free zones can do a world of good uh to help your child and then the last thing I'd recommend here the many things I think parents could do is to start a dialogue with your child about their use of social media um we don't always know how social media is making our kids feel uh from the and we may realize when we talk to them that they actually have their own concerns they might say yeah it's not making me feel really good but it's just like hard not to be on it everyone's like texting on this or everyone is uh you know everyone's you know sharing information and posting pictures on it I feel like I need to be on it you can only help them start to manage that if you know that that's a challenge that they're having so opening a conversation so your child knows that you're not judging them but you're trying to understand their experience is important also so you can help them understand what is not acceptable for them to experience on social media if they're being harassed or bullied by strangers uh that is a problem you want your child to to tell you about that to report that um if they see something posted online that's really concerning to them let's say they see a friend post that they're thinking of taking their own life or harming themsel in another way you want them to know that that's important to flag and to get help you know that they shouldn't just you know scroll past that so that conversation is really important and finally as parents we can lead by example right and this is hard because the truth is we've been talking about social media and youth and that's what the subject of my search and General's advisory was on but I have concerns about adults too I said as somebody who's had challenges in my own use you know of social media finding sometimes it bleeds you know past my bedtime and I'm realized you know I think m&a checked something for 5 minutes an hour later I'm still there you know scrolling through something uh and sometimes I you know you know I find myself over the years I found myself comparing myself also to posts I see online and unhealthy ways sometimes I find myself um sort of pulled into uh content uh that uh you know ends up being angry and vitriolic and leaves me feeling worse you know at the end so I've experienced this as well and I think as parents one of the hardest things to do is to follow this advice we're giving our kids to draw those boundaries as well and to put our devices away when we're around our kids uh one experience I had which sort of I still feel bad about but which really helped kind of knock some sense into me was after my my son was born uh my older child I was actually I was search in general at that time you know I had you know it was lot going on it was busy job Etc but I wanted to make sure that I protected bed times uh and meal times for us to be together as a family yet one day when I came home you know after dinner when we were doing the bathtime and bedtime routine getting my son ready uh for the night uh my wife was changing ing his diaper and instead of helping I was just standing at the side scrolling through my inbox and my wife who has infinite patience and is like one of the most well adjusted people that I know just paused and she turned to me and Alice said do you really need to be doing that right now and she said just very quietly but I felt this like such a sense of Shame when she did that because I was like what am I doing like this is my infant child you know and the rare few hours I have with them during the day and I'm just scrolling through my inbox in my phone like like this is terrible and look I know that all of us do this it maybe in different contexts but it was a wake up moment for me because I realized like one like as you know well as a neuroscientist we can't really multitask right we're rapidly task switching right and that was time in my when I head was in my inbox and my head wasn't with him you know and my heart wasn't with him right and I was just distracted and so as parents if we can honor those sacred times you know when we're with our children to keep our devices away meal times sleep time as well it's not easy to do but it really sets a good example for our kids um all Behavior change that we're talking about here the kind of behavior change I've worked with with patients over the years are physical activity and diet all of this is harder to do when we're doing it by ourself it's a lot easier to do do when we're we have a couple of friends or family members who we agree to do this with we hold each other accountable we encourage and support each other um it's how I've been able to make the most successful Behavior changes I've made in my life have come about because I have two good buddies uh Dave and sunny who are my my part of my brotherhood and the three of us as brothers talk about health we talk about our finances we talk about our family and our friendships and our failings and we help keep each other accountable and so I would just encourage parents like is this sounds daunting or overwhelming you don't have to do this alone think about one or two people other parents who you might want to do this with and I guarantee you there a lot of us are struggling with the same stuff and they would probably welcome an opportunity to do this in collaboration with another parent such spectacular advice that I hope everyone will follow not just for their kids but for themselves I think that whether or not social media is addictive in the in the true sense of the word is is kind of meaningless debate at this point it's at the very least a compulsive behavior for many of us and as you described it in example you gave it becomes reflexive yes we're just you know we're not necessarily seeking pleasure or looking to to engage in online battles it's just it's become reflexive sort of like finding yourself with your hand in the refrigerator just you even think about it you're just doing it so becoming more conscious of the use uh and thereby more conscious of the value of putting away the screens and social media for extended periods of time each day and certainly in the middle of the night folks neuroplasticity brain rewiring happens in the middle of the night while you're asleep and I this when you mentioned kids awake in the middle of the night looking at their phone I just I saw you Flinch oh my goodness it pains me and I've looked at my phone in the middle of the night I try not to but um but I'm certainly not in the window of Maximum plasticity either it's terrible for everybody but especially terrible for kids um what you just provided is an incredible let's just call it a I'll call it a mandate you didn't say it but a suggestion of of teaming up with people um to become more like-minded around these issues and to really promote health I along those lines I I really want to thank you um first of all for the conversation today you're incredibly busy you're responsible for uh an entire country is worth of um people so to take time to sit down with me and to discuss these topics for our audience is it incredible appreciated by me and and and by them I I feel comfortable extending their gratitude here and uh it's also clear based on today's conversation that you face an enormous number of challenges at the level of budgetary challenges by the way I'm going to work on that um it's hard to shut me up um as well as the the huge array of of issues that you confront and um and it's clear that it's a challenge that you've embraced for many years now under difficult conditions and that you're clearly willing to get out and talk to people and hear their criticism hear their concerns hear um and learn from them and so it's been of great benefit to us to hear and learn from you and I hope this won't be the the last of our conversations there's many more topics to cover but I just really want to thank you thanks ever so much for the the the intellectual power uh and the emotional power that you put into what you do cuz that is very clear you're a physician first and you care about your patients and your patients are all of us so thank you so much Andrew that's for me just incredibly kind of you I thank you I appreciate that and I've loved our conversation and you know for me what what I hope most of all for my kids for our country more broadly is that is that we can go deeper like beneath this these surface issues I I worry that we find ourselves disagreeing about and fighting about online and recognize that there is a deeper challenge that we are facing that I think underlies a lot of uh these the anger and the vitrio and this issue around how disconnected we become from one another I think is at the heart of that I don't think that there's any policy or program we can Implement that's going to ultimately fix what Al Society without fundamentally realizing that a lot of this is a manifestation of a society that has become more disconnected and More disinvested in one another like over time and that's just not who we are it's not how we evolved over thousands of years it's not how we're going to thrive in the future so I know that sometimes when you look at these big intractable problems uh like widespread loneliness in the United States that it can seem like hard to address these but I do want to encourage everyone to to recognize that when it comes to human connection that it is small steps that can make a big difference because we are hardwired to connect as human beings and if you if you just pause for a moment and if you just think for a moment in your own life about someone who has been there for you during a time of great need somebody who has stood up for you and you couldn't stand up for yourself someone who's helped to remind you of why you're still a good person why you still have worth and value to add to the world even when you had lost faith in yourself you think about their faith in you about their support for you about their love for you think about how healing that was that's the power that we have to help each other heal we are going through an identity crisis in many ways as a country where I think we need to ask ourselves who are we like what defines who we are what are the set of values that we want to guide us in our life to guide our country and I know that it feels like We're a nation of people who are mean who only care about ourselves who are throwing blame and anger at each other all the time who are pessimistic about the future but I actually don't think that's really who we are I think at our heart we are hopeful and optimistic people I think in our true nature we are kind and generous to one another um in our hearts we we we're interdependent creatures who recognize that if someone else is suffering we want to be out there to support them uh and who want to want people to be there to support us as well that's who who we really are but we have to to make a Clear Choice here about our identity you know as as individuals and as a country and recognize that that choice has real implications for everything else that we're talking about here that's the foundation and when I think about my own kids growing up like like many parents I worry about the world uh that that they're coming into um I I worry that they're going to use the wrong word even though their intentions are right and people are going to blame them or cast them out you know I worry that they're going to stumble and fall down and people are just going to keep walking by not caring you know because everyone's living their own life I worried that they might become someone who does the same thing to other people right none of which I want but I want for all of our kids is for them to grow up in a society where we care about one another we have each other's backs we recognize as that old African proverb goes that we can go fast if we go alone but if we really want to go far we go together and that's what I want for my kids in our country but that's what we each have the power to create in our own lives it starts with the decisions we make but how we treat one another do we for example reach out for 5 minutes a day to someone that we care about do we pick up the phone and call them to say hey I'm thinking about you we can all do that today do we give people the benefit of our full attention recognizing that while time is scarce our attention has the ability to stretch time it can make five minutes feel like half an hour but it's a hard thing for people to get because they're distracted by their devices but do we give people the benefit of our full attention and do we look for ways to serve one another recognizing that it's through our acts of service that we actually Forge powerful con actions but we also remind ourselves how much value we have to bring to the world and this is important in a time when the self-esteem of so many of us and our young people in particular is being eroded uh particularly by their use of social media so these are the steps that we can take to build Connection in our life but the core values I believe that have to be at the heart of our identity these values around kindness and generosity around courage and service these also have to animate the decision decisions that we make in our life about programs we advocate for the policies we support the leaders we choose they should all be reflections of the values that we want to see in our children and in society more broadly because I'll tell you that 90% plus of the decisions leaders make they make behind closed doors and what's guiding them in those moments are their values that's true whether you're the leader of a company uh or a nonprofit organization uh or a leader in government so those values matter and I want us as a country to speak more about the values that we choose about the identity uh that we want to Anchor ourselves to um that's the way in which I feel like America can be an even greater Beacon uh of Hope for the world because the world is struggling with this too we're not the only ones who are dealing with loneliness and isolation who are seeing anger uh and resentment and vitri all bubble up uh at extraordinary levels we're seeing mistrust in institutions soore U many countries are experiencing this I would love America to lead the way in some ways in showing what it's like to embrace a more human identity that's centered around kindness and service and friendship uh and generosity like to me all of these values ultimately Andrew stem from love right love is our greatest source of power it's our greatest source of healing uh I say that as a Doctor Who's prescribed many medicines over the years but there few things more powerful uh then love and its ability to help us through difficult times and help mend the wounds seen and unseen uh that we all carry with us and I think if we recognize that we recognize that you know we don't have to have an MD after our name uh or have gone to nursing school to be healers we all have the power to help each other heal like Andrew we are not fundamentally a nation of bystanders who just stand by while other people suffer like We're a nation of of healers and hop makers who can restore hope that the future can be better who can create a better life for ourselves and the people around us right now it's what we're capable of it's what we're built for that's the identity that I think we now more than ever need to embrace amen and thank you for that um I agree love is definitely the verb that can get us where we need to go thank you so much for your words for your um incredible efforts to support public health and uh hopefully to continue to support Public Health uh I know you've been at this a long time um and we've all benefited and um and thanks for your open-mindedness uh especially around some of the questions that invoke some Challenge and again for your taking the time to come talk with us today and uh I really also enjoyed it it's it's been a real pleasure and there was a lot of learning for me and um like I said before uh I hope it won't be the last time I hope not either no I look forward to the next time to staying in touch and uh just love this conversation thank you for what you've done for being this beautiful channel of information for the public but it's most more thank you for who you are you know like who you're Andrew like comes across very clearly uh you know when I meet you you just you have a good heart and you have good intentions you're man and we need more people like you in the world thank you right back at you thank you for joining me for today's discussion with Dr vivc Murthy the Surgeon General of the United States I hope you found it to be as informative as I did if you're learning from Andor enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zeroc cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a five-star review if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or topics or guests that you'd like me to cover on the hubman Lab podcast please put those in the comment section on YouTube I do read all the comments in addition please check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast not on today's episode but on many previous episodes of The hubbin Lab podcast we discuss supplements while supplements aren't necessary for everybody many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like improving sleep for hormone support and for Focus the hubman Lab podcast has partnered with momentous supplements and we did that for several reasons first of all their ingredients are of the very highest quality second of all they tend to focus on single ingredient formulations which make it easy to develop the most cost-effective and biologically effective supplement regimen for you and third momenta supplements ship internationally which we realize is important because many of you reside outside of the United States to see the supplements discussed on the hubman Lab podcast go to live mous spelled o us so it's Liv mous.com huberman if you're not already following me on social media you can do so by going to huberman lab on all social media platforms so that's Instagram Twitter now called X LinkedIn Facebook and threads on all of those platforms I cover science and science related tools some of which overlaps with the content of the hubman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the content covered on the huberman Lab podcast again that's hubman lab on all social media platforms if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network newsletter the neural network newsletter is a zero cost monthly newsletter that includes podcast summaries as well as toolkits so toolkits for sleep toolkits for Learning and plasticity toolkits related to dopamine regulation and much more again it's all zero cost you simply go to hubman lab.com go to the menu tab scroll down to newsletter and simply enter your email and we do not share your email with anybody thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with the US Surgeon General Dr Vivic Murthy and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

--- Video 182 ---
Video ID: eMqWH3LYiII
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eMqWH3LYiII
Title: Dr. Paul Conti: How to Build and Maintain Healthy Relationships | Huberman Lab Guest Series
Published: 2023-09-20 12:00:38 UTC
Description:
This is episode 3 of a 4-part special series on mental health with Dr. Paul Conti, M.D., a psychiatrist who did his medical training at Stanford School of Medicine and residency at Harvard Medical School. He is the author of the book, “Trauma: The Invisible Epidemic.” Dr. Conti explains how to find, develop and strengthen healthy relationships — including romantic relationships, work and colleague relationships, and friendships. He explains a roadmap of the conscious and unconscious mind that can allow anyone to navigate conflicts better and set healthy boundaries in relationships. We also discuss common features of unhealthy relationships and clinically supported tools for dealing with relationship insecurity, excessive anxiety, past traumas, manipulation and abuse. Dr. Conti explains how, in healthy relationships, there emerges a dynamic of the mutually generative “us” and how to continually improve that dynamic. The next episode in this special series explores true self-care, which can be cultivated through a process of building self-awareness along with other important practices.

#HubermanLab #Science #MentalHealth

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
BetterHelp: https://betterhelp.com/huberman 
Waking Up: https://wakingup.com/huberman 
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman 
https://www.livemomentous.com/huberman

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. Paul Conti
Website: https://drpaulconti.com 
Pacific Premier Group: https://pacificpremiergroup.com 
Trauma: The Invisible Epidemic: How Trauma Works and How We Can Heal From It: https://amzlink.to/az01KBLaUX3m6
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/dr-paul-m-conti-845074216

Resources
Guest Series | Dr. Paul Conti: How to Understand & Assess Your Mental Health (Episode 1): https://hubermanlab.com/guest-series-dr-paul-conti-how-to-understand-and-assess-your-mental-health
Guest Series | Dr. Paul Conti: How to Improve Your Mental Health (Episode 2): https://hubermanlab.com/guest-series-dr-paul-conti-how-to-improve-your-mental-health
The Iceberg Model: https://hubermanlab.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/09/The-Iceberg-Model.pdf
Pillars of Mental Health: https://hubermanlab.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/09/Pillars-of-Mental-Health.pdf

Timestamps
00:00:00 Build Healthy Relationships
00:02:04 Sponsors: BetterHelp & Waking Up
00:05:01 Healthiest Self in Relationships
00:10:51 Structure & Function of Self
00:15:44 Relationships, Levels of Emergence
00:22:48 Generative Drive in Relationships
00:35:00 Sponsor: AG1
00:36:26 Generative Drive, Aggressive Drive, Pleasure Drive
00:45:16 Romantic Relationships & Matched Generative Drives, Trauma Bonds
00:53:05 Generative Drive Expression, Libido, Giving & Taking
01:04:29 Sponsor: Eight Sleep
01:05:50 Generative Drive in Partnerships
01:11:16 Libido, Avoidance & Working through Barriers
01:18:02 Repeating Bad Relationship Patterns, Repetition Compulsion
01:29:23 Narcissism, Dependence, Attachment Insecurity
01:34:10 Abusive Relationships, Demoralization
01:39:37 Oppressors, Darkness, Hope & Change
01:48:08 Work Relationships, Oppression & Accountability
01:53:53 Jealousy vs. Envy, Narcissism
01:59:13 Power Dynamics in Relationships
02:05:54 Giving vs. Taking in Relationships
02:09:39 Transactions & Relationships; Family & Generative Drive; Flexibility
02:19:47 Relationships & Kindergarten
02:23:04 Anxiety in Relationships, Communication
02:31:32 The “Magic Bridge of the Us”
02:37:09 Mentalization, Getting into Another’s Mindset; Navigating Conflict
02:46:51 Healthy Boundaries
02:52:08 Self-Awareness, Mentalization
02:55:28 “Broken Compass” & Self Inquiry, “Map” Analogy
03:02:25 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Social Media, Momentous, Neural Network Newsletter

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

The Huberman Lab podcast is for general informational purposes only and does not constitute the practice of medicine, nursing or other professional health care services, including the giving of medical advice, and no doctor/patient relationship is formed. The use of information on this podcast or materials linked from this podcast is at the user’s own risk. The content of this podcast is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Users should not disregard or delay in obtaining medical advice for any medical condition they may have and should seek the assistance of their health care professionals for any such conditions.

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 183 ---
Video ID: gveDhZW-rUk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gveDhZW-rUk
Title: How to Use Music to Boost Motivation, Mood & Improve Learning | Huberman Lab Podcast
Published: 2023-09-18 12:00:35 UTC
Description:
In this episode, I describe how your brain and body are fundamentally wired to perceive and respond to music and how those responses can be leveraged to improve your mood, allow for processing sad emotions and enhance learning and performance. I explain the data showing how music can increase motivation for cognitive or physical work, what specific music has been shown to enhance cognitive performance, and whether silence or music is more effective in enhancing focus while studying. I also discuss how specific musical pieces can rapidly reduce anxiety, as well as certain prescription medications. I explain how listening to certain types of music can improve various health metrics (e.g., heart rate). Finally, I discuss how music helps to enhance neuroplasticity (rewiring of brain connections), thereby improving learning and memory. Whether you sing, play an instrument or enjoy listening to music, this episode provides numerous science-informed tools for using music to enhance productivity, mood, emotional states, and overall enjoyment of life.

#HubermanLab #Science #Music

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman  
ROKA: https://roka.com/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman 
Momentous: https://livemomentous.com/huberman

The Brain Body Contract
Tickets: https://hubermanlab.com/tour
Code: "Huberman"

Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Articles
Effects of music on the cardiovascular system: https://bit.ly/3Rqkmnn
Music versus midazolam during preoperative nerve block placements: a prospective randomized controlled study: https://bit.ly/3RqB5a5
40-Hz Binaural beats enhance training to mitigate the attentional blink: https://go.nature.com/3LmXWQk

Other Resources
How to Increase Motivation & Drive (Huberman Lab episode): https://hubermanlab.com/how-to-increase-motivation-and-drive
Controlling Your Dopamine For Motivation, Focus & Satisfaction (Huberman Lab episode): https://hubermanlab.com/controlling-your-dopamine-for-motivation-focus-and-satisfaction
Tools to Manage Dopamine and Improve Motivation & Drive (Huberman Lab episode): https://hubermanlab.com/tools-to-manage-dopamine-and-improve-motivation-and-drive/
Brainwaves (App Store): https://apple.co/3ZBK36N
Brainwaves (Google Play): https://bit.ly/3enO8HP
Dr. Eddie Chang: The Science of Learning & Speaking Language (Huberman Lab episode) https://hubermanlab.com/dr-eddie-chang-the-science-of-learning-and-speaking-languages
Dr. Erich Jarvis: The Neuroscience of Speech, Language & Music (Huberman Lab episode): https://hubermanlab.com/dr-erich-jarvis-the-neuroscience-of-speech-language-and-music 
Physiological Sigh: https://youtu.be/afAZ1hlvRjI
Marconi Union – Weightless: https://youtu.be/qYnA9wWFHLI

Timestamps
00:00:00 Music & Your Brain
00:03:32 The Brain Body Contract
00:04:12 Sponsors: Eight Sleep & ROKA
00:07:09 Music & Emotions; Brain & Body Interpretation
00:13:03 Music & Intent; Babies, Music & Movement
00:19:19 Tool: Health Metrics & Music, Breathing & Heart Rate
00:29:54 Sponsor: AG1
00:30:50 Music, Brain & Predictions
00:38:07 Music & Brain: Novelty, Arousal, Memories
00:44:22 Tool: Movement; Motivation & Faster Music
00:50:49 Tool: Cognitive Work & Binaural Beats 
00:54:11 Silence or Music for Studying?, White Noise, Binaural Beats
00:58:47 Tool: Retain Information & Internal Dialogue
01:00:53 Tool: Focus, Work Breaks & Music
01:04:11 Physical Exercise, Performance & Music
01:07:37 Sponsor: InsideTracker
01:08:43 Music & Shifting Mood
01:14:41 “Happy” vs. “Sad” Music, “One-Hit Wonders” & Artificial Intelligence
01:19:30 “Bass Face”; Music, Movement & Facial Expressions
01:22:46 Tools: Shift to Happy Mood with Music; Sad Mood Catharsis
01:27:30 Tool: Music & Reducing Anxiety, “Weightless”
01:31:16 Playing Instruments, Singing & Brain Connectivity
01:39:58 Music & the Brain 
01:42:14 Zero-Cost Support, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, YouTube Feedback, Momentous, Social Media, Neural Network Newsletter

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: Error: ParseError
--- Transcript not available or fetch failed ---

========================================

--- Video 184 ---
Video ID: qPKd99Pa2iU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qPKd99Pa2iU
Title: Dr. Paul Conti: How to Improve Your Mental Health | Huberman Lab Guest Series
Published: 2023-09-13 12:00:49 UTC
Description:
This is episode 2 of a 4-part special series on mental health with Dr. Paul Conti, M.D., a Stanford and Harvard-trained psychiatrist currently running a clinical practice, the Pacific Premiere Group. Dr. Conti explains specific tools for how to overcome life’s challenges using a framework of self-inquiry that explores all the key elements of self, including defense mechanisms, behaviors, self-awareness and attention. We also discuss our internal driving forces, how to align them and ultimately, how to cultivate a powerful “generative drive” of positive, aspirational pursuits. Dr. Conti also explains how to adjust your internal narratives, reduce self-limiting concepts, overcome intrusive thoughts, and how certain defense mechanisms, such as “acting out” or narcissism, show up in ourselves and others. The next episode in this special series explores how to build healthy relationships with others.

#HubermanLab #Science #MentalHealth

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
BetterHelp: https://betterhelp.com/huberman 
Waking Up: https://wakingup.com/huberman 
Eight Sleep: https://eightsleep.com/huberman
Momentous: https://livemomentous.com/huberman

Huberman Lab Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. Paul Conti
Website: https://drpaulconti.com 
Pacific Premier Group: https://pacificpremiergroup.com 
Trauma: The Invisible Epidemic: How Trauma Works and How We Can Heal From It: https://amzlink.to/az01KBLaUX3m6
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/dr-paul-m-conti-845074216

Resources
GUEST SERIES | Dr. Paul Conti: How to Understand & Assess Your Mental Health: https://hubermanlab.com/guest-series-dr-paul-conti-how-to-understand-and-assess-your-mental-health
The Iceberg Model: https://hubermanlab.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/09/The-Iceberg-Model.pdf
Pillars of Mental Health: https://hubermanlab.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/09/Pillars-of-Mental-Health.pdf

Timestamps
00:00:00 Improve Mental Health
00:02:19 Sponsors: BetterHelp & Waking Up App
00:05:26 Structure & Function of Healthy Self 
00:16:25 Agency & Gratitude
00:21:14 Aggressive Drive, Pleasure Drive, Generative Drive
00:30:00 Physical & Mental Health Similarities, Verb States
00:37:05 Sponsor: AG1
00:38:32 Lack of Motivation, Drives
00:43:06 Video Games/Social Media & Distraction, Generative Drive
00:51:46 Asking Better Questions, Psychiatric Medicine, Physical Health Parallels
00:59:10 Sponsor: Eight Sleep
01:00:30 Self-Reflection & Structure of Self “Cupboards”, Trauma & Agency
01:08:53 Feeling Stuck, Defense Mechanisms & Sublimation, Character
01:13:58 Self-Reflection & Function of Self “Cupboards”, Self-Awareness
01:19:24 Defense Mechanisms & “Acting Out”
01:26:43 Salience, Intrusive Thoughts
01:31:24 Self-Reflection, Behaviors & Strivings; Roadmap Forward
01:38:25 Internal Narratives, Childhood
01:44:44 Internal Narratives: Self-Scrutiny & Overcoming; Trauma
01:55:18 Time Required for Change, Understanding Intrusive Thoughts
02:03:13 Self-Reflection on Internal Drives; Envy
02:09:56 Generative Drive; Strong Aggressive Drive & Envy
02:21:50 High Aggressive Drive & Social Relationships, Narcissism
02:28:43 Narcissism, Destruction, Envy
02:37:18 Narcissism & Childhood, Change
02:41:26 Engaging with Narcissists, Disengagement
02:44:47 Demoralization, Learned Helplessness
02:49:34 Self-Inventory of Drives, Optimization
02:56:09 Social Media & Salience, Generative Drive
03:03:21 Rational Aspiration
03:13:16 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Social Media, Momentous, Neural Network Newsletter

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English
Andrew Huberman: [Opening theme music] Welcome to the Huberman Lab Guest series, where I and an expert guest discuss s cience and science based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today's episode marks the second episode in our four episode series with Dr. Paul Conti about mental health. The first episode in the series dealt with how to understand and assess your level of mental health. Today's episode is about how to improve your mental health. I do want to emphasize that you do not need to have heard or seen the first episode in order to understand or glean important information from today's episode about how to improve your mental health. But I do encourage you to go and listen to the first episode at some point if you have not already. Today's episode deals with several topics important to all of us, as well as protocols to improve one's mental health. For instance, you will learn how to guide yourself through a process of self inquiry in which you address certain key questions about your drives, your level of aggressive drive, pleasure drive, and the so called generative drive. These are essential things to understand about oneself if you want to guide yourself toward your aspirations, and if you want to understand how your subconscious processing is influencing your thoughts and your behaviors and your feelings in ways that sometimes serve your aspirations, and in other ways that can hinder your aspirations. Dr. Conti shares with us a way of assessing our internal narratives, as well as a way of creating a constructive self awareness and an understanding of where those narratives and that self awareness stem from in our childhood, so that we can navigate forward with the greatest sense of agency. We also talk about how to move past common hindrances to improving one's mental health, such as overcoming intrusive thoughts. And perhaps most importantly, today's episode provides information and protocols that anyone can use to cultivate their generative drive, which is a hallmark of mental health. Just a reminder that Dr. Paul Conti has generously provided a few diagrams that we include as PDFs in the show note captions. They are completely zero cost to access, and they can help you understand some of the material that was discussed in t he first episode of this series, as well as the current episode about how to improve your mental health. And while those simple PDF diagrams are certainly not necessary in order to understand the material in today's discussion or in the other discussions of this series, many people find them useful, so I encourage you to check out those links in the show note captions. Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford. It is, however, part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Betterhelp . Betterhelp offers professional therapy with a licensed therapist carried out online. I personally have been doing weekly therapy for more than 30 years, and while that weekly therapy was initiated not by my own request, it was in fact a requirement for me to remain in high school. Over time, I really came to appreciate just how valuable doing quality therapy is. In fact, I look at doing quality therapy much in the same way that I look at going to the gym or doing cardiovascular training such as running, as ways to enhance my physical health. I see therapy as a vital way to enhance one's mental health. The beauty of Betterhelp is that they make it very easy to find an excellent therapist. An excellent therapist can be defined as somebody who is going to be very supportive of you in an objective way, with whom you have excellent rapport with, and who can help you arrive at key insights that you wouldn't have otherwise been able to find. And because Betterhelp therapy is conducted entirely online, it's extremely convenient and easy to incorporate into the rest of your life. So if you're interested in Betterhelp, go to betterhelp.com/huberman to get 10% off your first month. That's Betterhelp, spelled he help.com/huberman. Today's episode is also brought to us by Waking up. Waking up is a meditation app that offers dozens of guided meditation sessions, mindfulness trainings, Yoga Nidra sessions and more. By now, there's an abundance of data showing that even short daily meditations can greatly improve our mood, reduce anxiety, improve our ability to focus, and can improve our memory. And while there are many different forms of meditation, most people find it difficult to find and stick to a meditation practice in a way that is most beneficial for them. The Waking up app makes it extremely easy to learn how to meditate and to carry out your daily meditation practice in a way that's going to be most effective and efficient for you. It includes a variety of different types of meditations of different duration, as well as things like Yoga Nidra, which place the brain and body into a sort of pseudosleep that allows you to emerge feeling incredibly mentally refreshed. In fact, the science around Yoga Nidra is really impressive, showing that after a Yoga Nidra session, levels of dopamine in certain areas of the brain are enhanced by up to 60%, which places the brain and body into a state of enhanced readiness for mental work and for physical work. Another thing I really like about the Waking up app is that it provides a 30 day introduction course. So for those of you that have not meditated before or getting back to a meditation practice, that's fantastic. Or if you're somebody who's already a skilled and regular meditator, waking up has more advanced meditations and Yoga Nidra sessions for you as well. If you'd like to try the Waking up app, you can go to wakingup.com/huberman and access a free 30 day trial. Again, that's wakingup.com/huberman. And now for my discussion about mental health with Dr. Paul Conti. Dr. Conti, welcome back. Paul Conti: Thank you. Andrew Huberman: In the first episode of this series, you laid out for us in a very structured way what true mental health looks like, essentially what we should all be aspiring to. And you touched on these themes of agency and gratitude as verb states, really, ways of being in the world that allow everybody to have some sense of well being, to have some sense of themselves in a way that is kind to themselves and to others, and really to feel good and do good in their life. Without question, this is what people want, right? You also spelled out for us these two pillars, the structure of self and the function of self, that consist of a number of different things that from which geyser up or kind of give rise to these feelings of empowerment, humility, agency, and gratitude. And reminded us several times that when we are challenged, when we're not doing as well as we would like, that we need to look back to the structure of self and the function of self and ask specific questions in order to arrive or re arrive at this sense of agency and gratitude. Yes, I think it would be wonderful for us if you could just recap the overall model because it has the components that I just mentioned, but some subtlety and some really key aspects of these pillars of structure of self and function of self. I think if people keep in mind for today's episode, which is about challenges that people commonly face, and even, if you will, phenotypes that we see commonly out there. For people that haven't heard of phenotypes, phenotypes are the typical appearance of something. So there is the phenotype of the anxious person, the phenotype of the person who just can't seem to get out of a rut. There's the phenotype of the traumatized person and these things play out differently in different individuals, men and women, boys and girls. But we're going to visit many of the most common phenotypes out there and think about how to do better, be better, feel better through the lens of the model that we spelled out in episode one. And of course, if people have not seen or heard episode one, today's discussion will still be entirely accessible to them. So in keeping with that, if you could just give us an overview of what this structure of the healthy self looks like as a roadmap for where we're all headed today. Paul Conti: Thank you. Thanks very much. Revisiting the pillars is, I think, the best place to start, because there really are routes to understand. And if we understand, then we can strategize, we can make change, right? We can make things better. So the first pillar, the structure of self, starts with the unconscious mind. This incredibly complicated biological supercomputer that's firing a mile a minute underneath the surface in us and is throwing up to the surface all sorts of thoughts and ideas and states that then the conscious mind apprehends. Then our awareness comes into play, and then we have defense mechanisms that sort of rise up from the unconscious mind, and they circle and sort of gird themselves around the conscious mind, which they can do in an unhealthy way or in a healthy way or anything in between. And then the character structure is sort of the nest around all of that. And it's from the character structure that we are engaging in the world in the ways that we're engaging. It's our active engagement with the world around us. And the idea is that the self grows out of that. It grows out of that nest sitting on top of the unconscious mind to the conscious mind rising above the defense mechanisms and the character structure. And if we go back to that, when we're trying to understand ourselves, trying to understand states of health as well as states of unhappiness or states that aren't healthy, by going back and looking at the structure, we can learn a tremendous amount. And the other side, the other pillar, is the function of self. And it really starts with a self awareness. The awareness that, hey, there is an I, I am in the world. This is 24 hours in the day are going to pass today, and I'm going to be doing one thing or another. I'm to some very significant extent deciding how am I going to engage in the world around me during that time. So on top of that are the defense mechanisms in action. So defense mechanisms, remember, are unconscious. So there's a lot then going on inside of us that's determining sort of the field set of options. There may be a lot of automaticity that narrows down the set of options of what we may entertain, what we may be aware of, what we may decide. And that could happen for better or for worse, depending upon the health of the defense mechanisms. But on top of that lies salient. So the idea then we would next visit, okay, what are we paying attention to. What's coming from inside, what's coming from outside. And we have to not pay attention to many, many things in order to pay attention to whatever our attention has alighted on at the moment. So it's a complex process, and it's worth looking at very closely if we want to understand ourselves. So after thinking about the defense mechanisms in action, the unconscious aspects of how we're engaging with the world, then next to consider is salience, which is sort of where does the mind arrive at rest? Where does the mind trend towards? Is it something internal? Is it something external? What are all the things we're not paying attention to in order to pay attention to something? And is that thing healthy? Is it not healthy? Is it serving us well? So there's so much to understand about salience. And then the next step beyond that is understanding behavior. How are we engaging with the world around us? What are our behavioral choices? What are our automatic behaviors? And then sitting on top of all of that are our strivings. So we have a sense of wanting something in the world around us, and what is that, and how are we trying to get to it, and how does it make us feel? So if we look at the ten elements, the five under the structure of self and the five under the function of self, then what we're really looking at is sort of like looking at ten cabinets. And if we're trying to understand ourselves, whether we're trying to just generally understand ourselves or we're trying to get at a problem, then looking in all ten of those cabinets makes sense. Some of them will be bare, meaning that they may seem to have very little to do with the problem we're bringing. And we kind of maintain an open mind. We may be led back to that cabinet, and there may be something there. But what usually happens is if we look in all ten places, we find a couple where there's some rich material to explore, sort of the X marks the spot, and then we go and we dig there to sort of mix metaphors we dig in the cabinet where we're going to find something. And then it leads forward a process of understanding. And if we're bringing those things into line, where we have a healthy structure of self and a healthy function of self, and we're aware of all of this and we're working on it, we're self aware, and we're paying attention to everything built on top of that, then what we end up with is a sense of humility, because one cannot be anything but respectful, compassionate understanding the complexity of all of this and understanding, how does it manifest itself in us? And just the very fact that we can make our ways in the world, right, is so impressive. And in a way, I think it brings to us a respect, just a respect for being here, navigating the world. And I think of that respect is born humility. The complexity of us, the fact that millions of things are going on underneath the surface, millions of neurotransmission and endocrinological function. All of this is going on under the surface. I'm not even aware of it. And then it kicks up to the surface, generates a tremendous amount of respect for the complexity and also the diligence and perseverance it takes us to navigate through the world. And I think built upon that understanding is a sense of humility and a sense of empowerment. And the humility and empowerment in action, right? So expressed, become agency and gratitude. And agency and gratitude, as you said at the beginning, we're seeing as verbs. That's how we're living life. It's through the lens, so to speak, of agency and gratitude that we're actively living. And again, I would put forth that when we look at measures of human happiness across disciplines and across time, this is always what we see is some way of describing how agency and gratitude, together, as verbs, manifest and then create happiness. It's the state that we're seeking to be in, because from that state of active agency and active gratitude, we achieve what it is that I think we're really searching for. And there are infinite words throughout human history to describe what that is. We might choose to use words like peacefulness, a sense of peace, a sense of contentment, being delighted by things, like just being amazed and impressed by things in the world around us. Like, this is a state that we're striving for. And I think when people talk about happiness and what we're really trying to get to, it's this. But it's not that these things are passive. These things are coming from the active agency, the active gratitude. And they're then interacting with a generative drive within us. We have an aggressive drive. We have a pleasure drive like this has been thought about now for a long, long time within mental health and validated in a lot of ways. But what hasn't been validated is that they're the only things, right? We see human beings striving. We see human beings wanting better for themselves and for the world around them. We see acts of kindness that seem to be rooted to nothing other than the act of kindness. We have within us a drive to know, to understand, to learn, to make better. And that has been described as many, many things across human history. But I think the words we might choose are a generative drive, a drive to create and to make better. And it's the generative drive as something active within us that is then aligning with agency and gratitude, the active ways in which we express ourselves. And then that altogether brings us the peace, the contentment, the sense of delight. Sometimes that may exist in us in a state of rest. But very often it's existing in us in a state of activity. And that's why people find the quote unquote happiness, like what people are seeking, not just in meditation. Sometimes we can find it there, but people also find it in action, right? They find it in doing that thing that they love to do, or in taking care of someone and learning something. So when we look at all of this, we can then have a route of understanding what is going on inside of us and how we can make the changes that let us be in this state, which is really the state that we are seeking. Andrew Huberman: I really appreciate that you highlight that agency and gratitude are verb states from which peace, contentment and delight emerge. And also the way that you explain the generative drive that is distinct from aggressive drives and pleasure drives that exist in all of us. I'm smiling because a number of examples of peace, contentment, and delight while in action come to mind. I mean, for me, podcasting, and in particular, preparing for a podcast, trying to mine the literature and figure out where the gems reside and where the confusion could emerge. And all of that brings about such peace, contentment and delight for me, but it's anything but passive. Likewise, yesterday had the experience of running into a puppy. It's been a while since I've owned a dog, and dogs are delightful. Puppies are particularly delightful. Paul Conti: I had the experience of seeing you light up when you ran into the puppy. Andrew Huberman: You did, and I'm still buzzing from that short interaction with the puppy. Downstairs the way Mariner puppy. I don't know why, but I just delight in animals of most all kinds. Not a fan of reptiles, sorry, reptile fans so much, but I just drive so much energy from it, and it felt like life energy. And the way the animal is sort of attentionally scattered is amusing to me as compared to the dog that he will eventually be, which is going to be more linear in his thinking. It encapsulates so much of the other things I love, like brain development, et cetera. Anyway, I highlight those examples because there's nothing passive about it. It's pure delight and joy for me, and it intersects with other delights and joys. And I think that as you describe agency and gratitude, peace, contentment and delight in these generative forces as well as other forces that exist in us, I think it's really critical that people understand that these are not states that you sit down and place yourself into, although perhaps one could through reflection or meditation or waking up from a really great night's sleep, things of that sort, but that these are things that we can find ourselves awash in if we are doing the right things. And those things can oftentimes be very challenging. So assuming I understand the way the model is spelled out correctly, I'm more and more delighted at the fact that this is not just accessible in one domain, but is accessible in many, many different domains for everybody. This is not something unique to my experience, even though I give examples from my own life, but that we really all do have access to this if we're looking in those cupboards, those ten cupboards, and asking the right questions and. Paul Conti: To maybe comment even a little further on the experience of you and the dog. So it was an experience of delight. And you enjoyed it, and it brought a sense of peace and contentment, like, all of that happens. But think about what that's linked to. I believe there's a strong sense of agency in you that you are enacting. There's a strong gratitude in you that you're enacting. You're handling your life in a way. And also for all of us, good things always come with good fortune, but it comes with our strivings and our achievements that you're in a place to delight in that. If you are unhappy, like, I don't like what I'm doing, I'm angry, I'm frustrated, then there's no room in you to find the delight. And the delight that you find is also very much linked to the generative drive. It makes me think of how you loved and nurtured Costello. So you have it in you to love and nurture a dog, and you have done that in a really wonderful way. And that generative drive is part and parcel of the delight you feel when you see a dog, because you love dogs and you think about nurturing, and it all comes together. The agency and the gratitude expressed as verbs puts you in a position to have that sense of delight which is so intertwined with your generative drive, with a sense of caretaking, a sense of creating the beyond self. Because although you enjoyed and loved Casello, you enjoyed and loved his happiness, right? So it all comes together. And I think it's interesting because in some ways it's a simple example, but that's life. Life has its big moments, but so much of our lives are the smaller moments that link together. And I think that smaller moment becomes a big example. Andrew Huberman: I appreciate that you mentioned Costello. For listeners of this podcast that have tuned into early episodes, Costello was the source of the background snoring. For those of you that haven't, you can go check. He was a 90 pound English bulldog mastiff who had many skills, the best of which was snoring. So in addition to the generative drive, which is something that we certainly want to talk more about today, you mentioned these other drives, aggressive drives and pleasure drives. And much of what we're talking about today is going to be where people can go wrong or where people struggle. We are also, of course, going to go deeply into where people succeed and in particular where people can ask questions of themselves, in particular what is working for them and why, as a route to understanding how to sift through those cupboards and understand what's not working and why, and come up with real actionable answers and then the ability to move forward. So if you would, could you tell us a little bit more about drives? Generally, when I hear drives, I can't help as a neuroscientist, but default to, okay, the dopamine circuit, or the endogenous opioid circuit, or the serotonergic circuit. But how do you conceptualize drives within us? And then perhaps you could tell us what the nature of aggressive drives and pleasure drives and generative drives. Paul Conti: So the concept of a drive, the definition of a drive, is something that's intrinsic to humans. So we could look at it as a motivation. I mean, we don't just lie on the ground and do nothing until we passively die. So something is going on inside of us that is driving us to do something other than that. And historically, the thinking in the field arising from early psychodynamic principles, the theory in the field that has really dominated the field, either directly or indirectly, in so many ways, has been that there are two drives within us, that there's aggression and pleasure. And again, these are just words, right? So we could apply many, many words, which is why, of course, we want to define what that means. So aggression, even though we're using that word for it, because the word for it is commonly used, but it means sort of forward active engagement. So a good, healthy amount of aggression using that word for the drive would be a strong sense of agency. Too little aggression can be a problem, then the person isn't bringing themselves to bear. So there's too little in the way of self determination, forward movement, empowerment, agency, right. And in the same way, too much of this drive becomes actual aggression. So the idea that I want more, and if I can't get it in certain ways, I'll just take it, right. So it starts to become what we more map to the word aggression, which would be something negative in most cases. Andrew Huberman: Like a desire or a tendency to harm. Paul Conti: Sure. As aggressive drives get higher, which you see why they're in us, because let's say we're defending ourselves, or you're defending a family member or like an entire family. Then it makes sense to have high levels of aggression if your family is threatened. So those drives are in us at potentially those high levels for a reason. But we certainly access very high levels of aggression without the indication of preservation of life or preservation of safety. The thought is, that's a drive in us, and that gets us up and off the ground, so to speak. And that the other drive, then, is pleasure, which, again, doesn't just mean that we all want to be hedonists. So pleasure could be even the pleasure of relief and safety. We're all back in the cave together, and we roll the stone in front of the door. We're safe. Throughout human development, pleasure comes in a lot of ways. It can come through the pleasure of food or other people, friendship, romance, sex. There are a lot of ways we can achieve pleasure. It can be relief of things that are unpleasant, relief of pain. But there's a drive towards this in humans, which, again, really does make sense. And too little of it, again, can be problematic because the person, then isn't motivated to sort of seek things because they're not anticipating or don't receive gratification and too much of a drive for pleasure can also create problems. We can kind of see how these two drives, like, okay, they get us up and off the ground, so to speak. But the question is, do they explain everything? And it's a very important question, because if they explain everything, then there's not room for behaviors and choices that are beyond the self. Right? There's not an explanation for the person who. I'll give you an example of a person I've taken care of, who's just a very strong swimmer, knows how to swim, has swimmed throughout his life, who was in a place, I saw video of it, where there had been a hurricane, and the waves were so frightening. They were just this huge surf, and there were people who had gotten dragged out. And you just see him, he runs into the water. He runs in and he goes. And he was really at risk. He needed to be saved himself, but he saved them. And I do not believe you can explain that through these drives. I don't think you can say, well, he was aggressive. He wanted to go and do something that was imposing himself on the world, or he got pleasure in thinking, I'm strong enough to go do this. I mean, I think we're really gyrating, we're contorting ourselves, right, in order to explain it that way. If we think there's a goodness in that man's heart, like, I know there's a goodness in that man's heart, I know him, right? And that goodness sees him in the moment, and he knows that maybe he can save them, maybe he can. He's not sure, but maybe he can. So the next thing you know, he's in the water. And I think things like the love and nurturing of other people, of children, love and nurturing of animals, of plants. There are things inside of us that we can't explain with those two drives. And I think they have led to a very sort of darker way of just conceiving of humans. I think it's a reason why now you look at us in the modern day and age, we come at humans through the lens of pathology. I mean, there's a very, very thick book that if a person is assessing, another person is thinking about, like, okay, what numbers in that book apply. Which is like, that's not the way to go about understanding humans. And I think if we just think there are those two drives, we're not doing justice to humans. One, I think it's not true. I think it's evident that it's not true. And then if we're framing it in a way that's not true. We are not appropriately respectful of humans. And if we come from what I believe to be the truth, that there is a generative drive in us, a drive for the beyond self, a drive to make things better, whether it has anything really directly to do with me or not. And as with the other drives, there can be more or less, in people, a combination of nature and nurture what genetically is in us, a predisposition based upon the genetic lineage that comes down to us and the recombination. And now we're a unique person with a unique set of drives, but they are impacted by the genetics and then they're impacted by life experience, a more strongly formative life experience. So the younger the person, the sort of deeper the impact of events they have, nurturing versus abuse on the array, on the relative weighting of drives within people. But ultimately, we get to these three drives and how they're functioning in a person, being a way of understanding and assessing how healthy or not healthy the person is. And then we look back to those ten cupboards for the answers. If we're finding things that we don't like, those drives are out of balance. And here are the problems they're causing. So very, very concrete issues of problems in people's lives. We can look and see where is that out of balance. And if it's out of balance, there's something in those pillars that are not in the right place. We can then go back and look in all those cupboards for, like, oh, where do we dig to find the answer? We learn things, we bring things more into balance. So the pillars are in a healthier place. And then what sits on top of it, as you use the word geyser. The geyser that then comes up and floats everything on top of it can do that in a healthy way. Andrew Huberman: Yeah. During episode one, we touched on some of the similarities between understanding the self and building towards a healthy or healthiest version of self, where agency and gratitude are these states that are being expressed. And one of the themes there was this idea, you know, people perhaps want to be healthy so that they live a long time, but presumably they also want to be healthy so that they can walk up flights of stairs, pick up their kids, move objects, not get injured, perhaps even do sport. And of course, some people want to be healthy for aesthetic reasons as well. And if we were having a discussion about physical health, we could address the major pillars there, which were items within the covered, like most people want some ability to have endurance or stamina to walk some distance or maybe even run some distance. As I mentioned before, walk up a flight of stairs, have some strength, some degree of flexibility, certainly some mobility, maybe even dynamic mobility, et cetera. And in order to address those or improve upon those, they could look in those covers and say, well, how much running, swimming, long form cardiovascular exercise am I doing per week? How many steps am I taking per day? How many times a week do I lift objects that are slightly heavier than is comfortable for me to lift, et cetera? It's very tangible, very concrete. Here you're making the psyche and the self and mental health very much concrete in some of the same way, saying, there are ten cupboards that one can look in, and these drives, as you refer to them as generative drive, aggressive drive, and pleasure drive, you'll probably tell us in a few minutes, can be expressed to varying degrees in different people and how that shows up and what that looks like. And I just want to frame this in people's minds as very similar to addressing whether or not, okay, if somebody can run very long distances, but they're always having aches and pains, or they feel weak, or they are weak, there are good reasons for that. They're overemphasizing one form of exercise. The expression is more along the lines of endurance and stamina, not strength, or vice versa. The power lifter who can lift 750 pounds from the floor in a deadlift, but walks up two flights of stairs and is belly breathing and has to stop at the top of the stairs. It's obvious in the physical realm, it's slightly more cryptic, or more cryptic in the psychological realm, but here it's becoming concrete for us. Paul Conti: I think it's very interesting and very ironic. Right? So the field that I'm in, the field of psychiatry, has historically wanted to be sort of part of the rest of medicine, or like the rest of medicine. And what I believe it's ended up doing is glorifying a taxonomy, glorifying a category, mechanism of understanding human beings. So in the way that if I'm practicing general medicine and you come in and you're congested, and I determine, like, oh, you have bacterial sinusitis. So now I've made a diagnosis, and now I know what I'm going to do about that, okay, I'm going to prescribe an antibiotic. Now, the thought comes in of what antibiotic. But the identify sinusitis, now you need an antibiotic, is like kind of how medicine works. So the thought was psychiatry is going to categorize everything. So we'd say, okay, I've listened to you like, I know your number or your numbers. And then once I've given you the numbers, now I know what to do. I prescribe this medicine, that medicine, these many sessions of a certain kind of psychotherapy. And that doesn't work. It doesn't work in mental health. It may. It's not that it never works, but if you're going to try and understand people, it's different. A problem of self. If I have a lack of confidence in one area of life and not in others, that's a significant issue. It is not like bacterial sinusitis, where then, okay, arrow goes to prescribe antibiotic. And I think what is ironic is that this route of approach actually does bring psychiatry or mental health into line with the rest of medicine, r ight. Which is why you can make that parallel and it fits well, right. When you're making the parallel to physical health and to I want to be healthy. Okay, what are the components of that? What am I doing to achieve that if something's not the way I want? Let me go back and look at those components. It may be because it's more tangible, sort of essentially easier to comprehend, right. Because it's more concrete. But I don't, in a sense, see it as cryptic, just less obvious. But if we go and we look at it and we say, oh, that really makes sense. In a sense, it makes sense that it makes sense, right? If there's a mechanism of understanding that applies to lots and lots of things that are more concrete, why would a similar kind of mechanism, like understand what the components are, understand what's built on top of them? This, I believe, is how psychiatry actually fits with the rest of medicine, not by glorifying a taxonomy, but by coming through the lens of understanding. Andrew Huberman: Yeah, I couldn't agree more. And I think that what's so reassuring is that both in terms of creating physical health across the various domains of heart health, lung health, endurance, strength, et cetera, cognitive health, as well as mental health is verbs. It comes back to action items that we each and all should engage in, in order to arrive at the states and ways of being that we all want to be in. Right. We want to feel healthy, look healthy, et cetera. We want to be happy. I know very few people who don't want to be happy. I mean, certainly there are people who give up, but we'll talk about that today and routes out of that. But at the end of the day, it's all about looking in those bins, asking specific questions, and then moving forward in specific actions to get to the place of empowerment, humility, agency, gratitude, peace, contentment, delight, et cetera, as opposed to simply using words and understanding to arrive at insight and then stopping there and expecting everything to change. And I think that's where a lot of people are confused about psychology, therapy and psychiatry. And as you mentioned, psychiatry has its own shadows, if you will, within it, where the use of drugs, which certainly can be very useful, even life saving. Paul Conti: Absolutely. Andrew Huberman: Oftentimes is seen as a fix all that somehow could reorder everything within the cupboards and make the recipe just right, when in fact, we'll talk about today. That is generally not the best route, but again, with the understanding that drugs can be very powerful, tools Paul Conti: Play a role. Yeah, right. But it's important we understand what role is appropriate for them, and that's where we often go astray. Andrew Huberman: I'd like to take a brief break and acknowledge one of our sponsors, AG1 . AG1 is a vitamin, mineral probiotic drink that meets all of your foundational nutrition needs. I started taking AG1 way back in 2012, so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast. The reason I started taking AG1, and the reason I still take AG1 once, or generally twice per day, is that it's the easiest way for me to ensure that I'm getting all of the vitamins, minerals, probiotics and fiber that I need in my diet. Now, of course, it's essential to get proper nutrition from whole foods, but most people, including myself, find it hard to get enough servings of fruits and vegetables each day, and especially to get enough prebiotics and probiotics to ensure gut health. As you may know, your gut contains trillions of little microbiota, the so called gut microbiome, which establishes critical connections with other organs of your body to enhance brain health, as well as to support your immune system and other aspects that relate to mental and physical health. One of the most common questions I get is, if you were to take just one supplement, which supplement would that be? And my answer is always AG1, because by taking AG1, I'm able to ensure that I'm getting all of the vitamins, minerals and probiotics that I need to enhance my mental health, physical health and performance. If you'd like to try AG1, go to drinkag1.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs, and they'll give you a year supply of vitamin D3 K2. Again, that's drinkag1.com/huberman to claim this special offer. So as we move forward here in defining and helping people gain, for lack of a better word, agency over their own mental health and self understanding, and defining for them what action items to take, I'd like to ask you about some of the things that I observe in the world and hear a lot about, in particular from the audience of this podcast. It's obvious to me that people vary in terms of their level of aggressive drive, pleasure drive, and presumably generative drive as well. One common question is, how do I become more motivated? Right? And of course, that opens up a bunch of other questions, like, are people afraid of failure? And that's why they're not motivated? Are people afraid of success? Is that why they're not motivated? Is there some underlying childhood trauma or unconscious process that's driving that fear? And so on? But if we were to take the psychiatrist's perspective, your perspective, if someone comes to you and says, I just don't really feel like trying. School is hard, school loans are excessive, which is true, by the way. It's not even clear that with a degree I can do much, or I had a series of failures in the work domain or in the relationship domain, and they're just feeling weighed down as if it's not worth trying. What does that tell you in terms of where to look? And what does that tell you in terms of their drives? I mean, do we conclude something about their innate level of aggressive drive or their pleasure drive or their generative drive? I think there are many such people out there, and then we'll consider some other kind of phenotypic examples. Paul Conti: So it's a great example because any good clinician could hear that story and have thoughts about it that could and would hopefully be helpful without necessarily referring to drives. I think you can anchor any set of assessments, any evaluation, any attempted understanding to drives, but it doesn't have to be that way. So, for example, you might ask that person more questions about what they're doing, how they spend their time, because you're telling me about someone who's not getting enjoyment or gratification out of anything. And that then becomes of interest to me. Is there something this person does enjoy or something they'd rather be doing? Did they go to college and take on a bunch of loans because they felt that was better, because they thought they were going to do something that now they actually don't want to do ? Or that opportunity isn't there, and now they're frustrated? What is inside this person that might seem different than that. And again, the answers could be complicated. It could be. Maybe that person enjoys what they're doing, but the cost of living where they are is so high that they still feel miserable. There's a sense of privation, and then that gets backmapped to like, I'm not getting any pleasure out of anything. So the answer could be as simple as you strategize with the person of, for example, does a person like that move or move to a different area? There's so many ways of looking at this and so many ways of understanding this. But you're describing someone to me who is kind of really complaining that nothing is feeling good, right? Nothing's providing a sense of enjoyment or of pleasure, right? So I would probably be interested in that first and think maybe the pleasure drive is higher than what's being fulfilled. Maybe the pleasure drive is low, and that's an issue in and of itself. We sort of learn those things. Maybe the aggressive drive is low, and if that person just put a little more energy into it, right. Like they could be in a different place. So you try and help the person understand themselves so that you can make change. And again, that understanding doesn't have to be anchored to the drives. But I do believe the drives are at the root of all understanding, because if you sit with that person and you talk to that person, then you're going to be able to understand what is out of balance, either in the actual array of the drives or in how they're being experienced. Because again, if you have a high pleasure drive, for example, and it's not gratified, right. That represents a problem. Andrew Huberman: What about people who can experience some pleasure or can keep busy, say, for instance, on social media or playing video games and I should also say perhaps it's bringing them to a place of peace, contentment and delight. But in some sense, it's not really generative. I'm not going to cast judgment and say that video games and social media are all a waste of time. I mean, I'm on social media trying to provide value to people and learnings, and I derive value and learnings from other accounts as well. But there are these milestones, if you will, in life. I mean, not that everyone has to go to college and get married and have a family. There are a lot of different paths through life that I would consider successful. But in some sense, there are milestones, like we want to move forward. There's this phenomenon nowadays of a lot of young people so called failure to launch, like they're not leaving home or they're not finding a vocation. They're not feeling as if they're good at anything. Or they have the sense that unless you're going to be top 1% in something, it's not worth trying. But they can still find what most people would describe as pleasures. Like they might enjoy food maybe a little too much. They enjoy alcohol maybe a little too much. They enjoy social media or video games, maybe a little too much. And I say a little too much because it's providing more or less a sink or a reservoir for their aggressive and pleasure drives. That's not moving them forward in the standard milestones of life. I hear about that a lot. I see that a lot. So it's a slightly more complex phenotype than described before as just simply the a motivated or non motivated person. But what do you think of the phenotype I just described? Paul Conti: Because we're unique. Each person is unique, although we fit categories. So there are categories a person there could fit that could be different from what I'm saying. But I think most people, they say on balance. What is most prominent? I think what is most prominent in that situation is there's something out of balance in the generative drive . And what you see a lot of times is the person has a generative drive in them that's higher than their ability to realize that drive. The generative drive then is frustrated. So I'll give an example. And it's a real true story of a person who had worked very, very hard, gone to school for a long time, and had achieved a very high paying job. And that was the goal. It's a prestigious job, it's a high paying job. And the person for a while was doing quite well at it, and things went relatively rapidly in a negative direction. So maybe for a little while, the person's doing okay. Then the person becomes very negligent of themselves and their environment when they're not at the job. So the house is a mess, things are dirty, the person is wasting time with things. So this is a person who enjoys it wasn't exactly video games. Let's say it could have been. Well, it enjoys them to a certain degree and can really gain pleasure and feel good about the time spent . But starts spending too much time. Now what was pleasurable starts becoming a distraction mechanism. And then what that transitioned to was overuse of alcohol. So now you have either something that is actually destructive and was negative to job performance towards the person. This wasn't a person who was drinking a lot before, and this is a person who was miserable when they were drinking or they were sort of wasting their time. And we're aware of all of this. Well, there was a very clear problem, which is that that person had no interest in what they were doing. None whatsoever. It felt like the majority of waking hours were spent in an automaton like way, but being awake and aware of the tedium of it, the frustration of it. Andrew Huberman: The professional side. So they essentially had very little intrinsic curiosity or desire to do the job that they were successfully doing. Paul Conti: Right. Which comes out only after exploration, because it seems like, well, what's going on with this person? This person has a good job and their life was going really well, and they're doing well financially. And is this person trying to now overly indulge themselves? Is that why they're drinking? What's going on? And what you feel is that this person had a strong, generative drive, and it wasn't met one little bit by what he was doing, which was creating such frustration inside that the person was either taking himself online or doing something that was punitive and self injurious. And this is a real story. The person exchanged that job for a job that paid a 10th of what the job they had paid. And the change in the person's life was amazing. Like, I didn't know this guy could smile. He became happy. He loved what he was doing. He sold the larger house, bought a smaller house, kept it beautifully, like he was happy. That's what he needed to be happy. Because then the generative drive in him, he loved what he was doing, gets enacted, it gets expressed, and then other things can come then into line. He's not being over aggressive towards himself and drinking too much because he's saying, oh, to help with you, to the world around him and to himself. He's not taking something that serves a purpose in his life. Like, again, if the example had been video games, it would be like, yeah, great. You enjoy doing that X amount of time and go do that and get gratification from it, as opposed to then over relying on it. And then it's not providing gratification. It becomes a distraction. So those things came back into balance in his life, but there had to be the understanding. And I think there's a lot of that in people who have a generative drive in them that they feel is frustrated by a world around them that isn't cooperating. Now, do I think we can understand that and change that in the vast majority of people who are in that place. Yes, but it has to be looked at first, right. Because it's not always that. It's just that a lot of the time. So it has to be understood what is it in that person? And then how do you go back to those pillars and look at what's going on, that the person is in that place? Because the world can bring us a lot of difficulties, right? And that person who now is saddled with a lot more loans than they expect. I have tremendous compassion for that and sympathy for that. That's real. Right? So people can be up against a lot of things and that's just one of them, right? But it doesn't mean that life can't be okay. It doesn't mean that, but the person has to feel that there's some way, they have to understand enough about themselves to say, okay, this is what this is. And I kind of see what this is and why and how I'm here. And from there I can start to plot a route to something that is better because, yes, we have our difficulties and we can have a lot of them, right? But for the vast majority of us, it's not like they're not surmountable. We have to just understand them. And let's say if that person goes and says, I'm going to get some help, and they go and someone says, okay, you get ten sessions of cognitive behavioral therapy and you try and like, how can that person think differently? Then they'll feel differently. And look, cognitive behavioral therapy has its place, right? But it's not going to solve that. That person needs to understand something about themselves, not redirect their thoughts to better places. So if the person gets a reflex, because that reflex works well for the system, a reflex works well for the system that's treating that person, for the medical system, the insurance system, that person isn't helped one bit, right? And maybe a medicine can help. Maybe a medicine helps to just take down the anxiety and the tension in the person. Then the person can sort of think more about it. And truly medicine did help this person because the idea of leaving the job. I'm leaving the prestige, I'm leaving the money, is that okay to do like? It generated a lot of anxiety and it helped to kind of bring the temperature down a little bit of that so that he could think about it, engage in therapy, ultimately navigate to where he wanted to be. Then we could back away from the medicine. So medicine has a role. But if he just got medicine, what are the odds of that helping? Like, zero, right? Because it's not going to make the answers unless somehow the person feels a little bit better and figures it out on their own. It's not how it works, right? So medicine has its place, but a kind of therapy that recognizes the limitations of medicine in most situations and is designed to really help the person understand, like, that's what we need. Andrew Huberman: The example you gave is a spectacular one because, as you mentioned, medication had its place. Perhaps even redirection of thought in some sense had its place, because, as I recall, under the pillar of function of self, one of the key items is salience. What we pay attention to internally or externally, what our internal narratives are. But in staying with the example of this individual, again as a phenotypic example for everybody to learn something from, the asking of better questions about oneself is really what leads to the understanding. So, like, better forms of inquiry, to me, these better forms of inquiry, better questions are really the cardiovascular exercise, the strength training, the flexibility training, the mobility training, coordination training of physical health just translate to mental health. Paul Conti: It's so interesting, right? Because if you think about it, in the example I gave, both the therapy part through the system. The CBT has a place. And the medicine part also had a place. So both of those things have their role. But if we build the whole story of, like, this is what this is, and this is how you're going to be helped around those things, we don't help that person at all. In fact, we ultimately, if you take on balance, you take all comers, we end up doing harm. Andrew Huberman: Well, in some ways, if we stay with the analogy of physical health, it would be like the person who wants to get in shape and then they get a, i'm not picking on peloton as a brand, but just a stationary bike. And they pedal every morning and they lose weight, their blood pressure goes down, they're doing better. But then at some point, we know with certainty that if you just do the same form of exercise over and over again, sooner or later you're going to get overuse injuries. So then there's like the lower back piece and another piece and you become out of balance. But I guess this is stealing from the Lance Armstrong book. But it's not about the bike, right? It's not about the bike. It's about the elevation of heart rate. It's about whatever other healthy activities go along with exercising first thing in the morning and all the things that you're not doing as a consequence of exercising in the morning. So it seems to me that these better lines of inquiry as the path to better mental health, a better life, that sit under these pillars of structure of self, function of self, are really the key. Paul Conti: But in this example, the parallel that you made is even more dramatic. It wouldn't be the stationary bike, right? Because a stationary bike is achieving a lot of ends, right. It would be more like telling the person, you should walk more briskly when you're going upstairs. That's a good idea, but that's not going to make the change. So the idea that some CBT, some medicine makes sense, it's more like that. It's not that walking more briskly up the stairs isn't a good thing, it's that we can't build the story around your whole health is going to change based upon that. And then that's a problem. Then if the person thinks, just walk more briskly up the stairs and you'll be healthier, because when it doesn't work now they've failed. And this gets used a lot in mental health. That person failed this therapy, failed that medicine. I think it's so also ironic because that's often what the person internalizes. Well, they failed because we set them up 100% for failure, right? Because we took things that have their role, at least potentially have their role, and we built the whole story around them because that story is convenient for the systems that are providing the care. It's convenient for the healthcare systems, it's convenient for the insurers. CBT packages very nicely. And you could see how if you start changing thoughts and how they make you feel like you can get some movement on the surface, even if there's no movement underneath. And again, I'm not saying CBT is bad, but to see it as the whole answer guarantees failure in so many situations. Same thing with the medicine. If you build the whole story just because it's convenient. And by and large, medicines are cheaper than people, right? So you can prescribe medicines very reflexively. Psychiatrists with 15 minutes with a patient that they can't then see back for a couple of months. Like, how does that go well? The answer is it only goes well the way a broken clock is right a couple of times, twice a day, right? I mean, look, sometimes it goes well where it just somehow it works out. And that person can do a little bit of therapy in 15 minutes and choose the right medicines, but by and large, we do those things because they're convenient for the systems, even though that's why people don't get better like we think they would. That's why they stay in systems. That's why they come in and out of emergency rooms. That's why they're not able to stop the drugs that end up only being stopped when the person dies. This happens all the time, and we don't stop it because we're coming from a perspective that is so limited. That's not saying, let's take a step back and look, can we really help someone? Can we really help that person understand? Can we help that person make change? Which ultimately would be, of course, so much better for the person and so much better for society, but is also better if we just look at, bottom line, dollars and cents. Because the short term view of it is cheaper today to have a psychiatrist at a 15 minutes appointment reflexively prescribe a medicine that is cheaper today. Is that cheaper across time when that person is utilizing more resources or they're in and out of emergency rooms? It's so short sighted, which fits with many ways in how our society works, right. That we want gratification and we want gratification rapidly. That's why a person would accept that their problems could be changed by medicine, right? We're kind of conditioned that way. Andrew Huberman: Well, of course there's the cost we don't see, which is that person doesn't get the opportunity to express their generative drive, and the consequence of that is incalculable. Paul Conti: Right? Yes. And if we take a step back and we look at that, I think that what we will see is that we have, it's not quite like painted ourselves into a corner, but it's like the idea that if there's a beautiful tapestry that's the size of the wall, that you can see that only standing back from it. I mean, this goes back, I think, a couple of thousand years, this sort of thought and idea. But if you come up too close to it, then you can't see what it means anymore. And we're up so close to it that we're thinking, well, okay, how could one parameter change? And can this person get a 15 minutes visit sooner rather than later? Or how about this medicine instead of that? And then it's like our noses are right up against the tapestry and we don't see that we're not doing right by individual people a lot of the time, and we're not doing right by society, which then, if you stop and think about it, we're not doing right by us because any one of us could be in that position, and many of us have been in that position being on the other side of things and really needing help and needing to understand so any of us can be there. So if we're failing a lot of individual people and we're failing the society, it doesn't matter who we are listening to this, ultimately we're failing ourselves. Andrew Huberman: I'd like to take a brief break and acknowledge our sponsor, Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with cooling, heating and sleep tracking capacity. I've spoken many times before on this podcast and elsewhere about the fact that getting a quality night's sleep on a regular basis is the foundation of mental health, physical health and performance. When we're sleeping well, everything goes better. And when we are not sleeping well or enough, everything in terms of mental health, physical health and performance gets far worse very quickly. One of the key things to getting a great night's sleep is to control the temperature of your sleeping environment. And that's because in order to fall and stay deeply asleep, you need your core body temperature to drop by about one to three degrees. And in order to wake up feeling refreshed, you need your core body temperature to increase by about one to three degrees. That all becomes very easy when using an Eight Sleep mattress cover because it allows you to program the temperature of your sleeping environment at the beginning, middle and towards the end of your night when you wake up. I started sleeping on an Eight Sleep mattress cover over two years ago and it immediately and persistently improved the quality and depth of my sleep and as a consequence, I wake up feeling far more refreshed. I have enhanced mood, focus and alertness throughout the day. If you'd like to try Eight Sleep, you can go to eightsleep.com/huberman to save up to $150 off their pod 3 cover. Eight sleep currently ships in the USA, Canada, UK, select countries in the EU and Australia. Again, that's eightsleep.com/huberman. Lets therefore talk about what does know, and again, placing on the shelf the fact that medications can help and CBT cognitive behavioral therapy can help, but they are just but two components of a much larger picture. The map that we described briefly at the beginning of today's episode, and that is, by the way, available as a downloadable PDF in the show note captions if people want to look at it visually and that was described in a lot of detail in episode one, which I hope people will take the time to listen to because it's so rich with depth of understanding and I'm certain everyone will learn a ton about themselves and others simply by listening to your words, I'm absolutely certain of that. That map provides essentially a description of the bins, the cupboards to look in to arrive at better answers and even the sorts of questions that one might ask. If we could just talk about that in the context of the example that you gave of this person who made this really incredible choice to move away from this higher paying job. They were overindulging in certain maladaptive behaviors. And again, we will use this example. But this example is but one of an infinite number of examples that we could use of a person who's in a struggle. They're doing something that's not working for them, and they're also not doing things that they know they ought to be doing. Okay, this is important for people to understand, because there are going to be people out there that are thinking, oh, like this poor guy, he's making tons of money. Poor him. But he was experiencing deep misery, lack of satisfaction. So it could have been the reverse example. Like, the person isn't in a job that brings about enough wealth for them to thrive. Right. Because there are financial realities to life. Paul Conti: It's just one example , right. Andrew Huberman: Right. Paul Conti: But it's a good one, I think, because the person left the money. Right. So it's like, well, what would make you leave that? Right. Well, what would make you leave that is if you're miserable in the situation with that, and you're happy in the situation without it. Andrew Huberman: Right. So it's about leaving misery and finding happiness. So if you'd be willing to share with us a little bit of your mindset during those sessions, meaning the sorts of questions you asked him about the structure of his self or to reveal the structure of his self and the function of his self that allowed the both of you to eventually set him down this far better course. What's better than moving away from frustration and overindulgence and maladaptive behavior to deep satisfaction, peace, contentment and delight, and to become a generative human being. Paul Conti: Right. So we can look in each of those ten cabinets. Right? So let's say we look in the unconscious mind cabinet. There's not much there. When the person was growing up, it was very clear that having more money and having a job that impressed people was an important thing. He internalizes some of it, so some of it's unconscious, but by and large, he's aware of it. Andrew Huberman: And then that was revealed to you how? You would ask him a question about, tell me about your upbringing. And he would say, yeah, money was important to my family but I always felt like we had enough. He wasn't super wealthy, but it had enough. When you say there wasn't a lot there, do you mean that there was no kind of like, X marks the spot or blinking red light? Like, whoa, there's something really in his unconscious mind that's in his way. Do I have that right? Paul Conti: Well, more because it was conscious. So he was aware that it was very much like beat into him. Right? Like, this is the only way to be okay is to have a prestigious job that makes a lot of money but he's aware of it. If he weren't aware of it, we have to bring that to light. Right? But he was aware. He's like, look, it has a big impact on me. It makes it hard to step away. Like, I know I don't really care that much about the money, but I also kind of do. Andrew Huberman: Sure, I always say money can't buy happiness, but it certainly can buffer certain stressors in life. Sometimes you hear people who have a lot of money saying, like, money can't buy happiness because there are a lot of miserable rich people. But it's very different to have two night nurses to take care of a baby than to be the person who has to stay up all night taking care of a kid, especially, or a single mother versus a mother that has a partner who's willing to pitch in. You just can't compare Paul Conti: That's absolutely true. In this case, we're just looking at money as money as an endpoint, right? The idea that no matter what, how secure and safe is more money better? And he had an intrinsic overvalue of that. So it made it harder to step away from it because he was overvaluing it. He knew he was overvaluing it just in and of itself. Not even for what it gets you, right? But for the psychological meaning of it. Then we look at his defensive structures. If we look in that cupboard, you see that they've really shifted, right? They shifted from healthy places. Now they're sort of twisted and distorted. And he's doing a lot of denial, a lot of avoidance, a lot of rationalization. He's enacting a lot of aggression towards himself. And he's doing a lot of projecting. He's harming himself with the alcohol. He's punishing himself. So his defensive structure, it can be healthy. We know that because it was healthier, right? But then we see that it is so twisted. So we learn a lot from that, right. A lot is conscious in this person, the defensive structure, can be healthy because it was healthy... Andrew Huberman: Eventually it was healthy. Paul Conti: Well, it was healthy before. Andrew Huberman: I see. Paul Conti: It was healthy before. So you know that it can be healthy again. He has it in him to have healthy defenses. They just started getting away from him as he felt less and less satisfied with his job and more and more angry with himself and more and more miserable. Andrew Huberman: This is a really key point for me and everyone else to understand. Throughout the years of high school and college and friends and things of that sort, I would hear this like, "I used to be really good at fitness, or if I had a dollar for every time someone said, you should have seen me in high school". Like, the person who lets themselves go and arguably is very busy with professional duties and family duties, and you can understand why their time is more compressed than it was when they were in high school. But nonetheless, you hear these sorts of things all the time. I used to have this sense of I could do things or that things could work out, and then it's as if there was a previous version of themselves that is completely atrophied and the new version of themselves or the later version of themselves rather just simply doesn't have access to that anymore. Paul Conti: That's the impact of trauma. Whether it's big trauma or it's a big event or it's multiple things, like, oh, the world just isn't rewarding me, I'm trying. The world's not rewarding me. I'm trying. The world's not rewarding me. Then people become dispirited, demoralized. It's the trauma of that that takes away the sense of self, the sense of agency. Like, I thought I could do things before, now I don't think I can do things, right. But nothing has really changed in me. That's a problem and it's a problem. The vast majority of times it's born of trauma. Andrew Huberman: Does that necessarily mean early childhood trauma? Or I suppose it could be later life trauma. I mean, one of the things that I like about what you're saying so much is that you, the psychiatrist, hears, I used to be able to do something well or feel well. And that's like, it sounds like is a signal. It's really a beacon of health that still exists in the person, but that they're out of touch with. I think for most people, when they think about themselves or people who talk about how they used to be functional in some domain, and they're no longer functional in that domain any longer. It sounds as if things are fundamentally broken. It's as if a piece of them that was functioning drifted out of their body and left. But I love the optimism, because I think so much of what we're interested in covering today is not just what's not working and why, but also what's working and why. And what used to work and why. And the idea that within these cupboards there can be the discovery of problems. Clearly, that's why one goes to the cupboards as we're defining it, but that there are a lot of answers. The ingredients for success already exist within us. Paul Conti: Especially if we know we've had that ability before, right? Because we know that we had it before. So think about in this man. He felt that he couldn't make change. Like now he's stuck. I got a lot of things done. I was able to get myself into this school and achieve this and then get this job. He could do all of those things. But now he feels like he can't do anything to make himself happy. So we know he could do that. He had a strong sense of agency. He does it now, right? And like people often do, they feel a sense of loss. Like, naturally, I've had this happen in myself. It feels like something's cut out of you and there's something hollow. I had that thing, and now I don't. Hence the I'm broken, I'm hopeless. The things that we hear over and over and over again. So think about the shift in this person to what's actually going on, which isn't that hard to discern. We just pay attention to it. So then if we run up the structure of self, we say, okay, not a lot of it is rooted in the unconscious mind, right? There are problems of overvaluing certain things, but they're in the conscious mind. Andrew Huberman: He knows. Like in his household, over dinner, it was dad or mom being proud of some dollar amount that they had achieved. So that narrative exists. And he's like, yeah, money was a big deal in my family kind of thing. By the way, I'm not speaking about my family. Rarely were their discussions about money. There were discussions about other things, of course. But in this hypothetical.Sorry. Paul Conti: He knows. He overvalues it, right? He knows that independent of what money buys and what he needs and all that, he just puts too much importance in money. And he knows that. Right? So, okay, they're conscious mind issues. He's pretty aware of them, and they're pretty kind of set in him. Like those are the issues, and they're there. Okay, we learned that. Then we go look at his defensive structure. Boy, that's very, very helpful to talk about. Wow, you had a very healthy defensive structure. What were you doing before? A lot of sublimation. Right? Andrew Huberman: Could you explain sublimation? Paul Conti: Yeah. Take anxiety or tension or something negative in the self, or that could be negative, and you channel it towards something positive. He channeled that energy towards learning. He channeled some of the aggressive drive into a sense of agency that got achievement. So he looked and he said, right, that network of defense mechanisms that comes up out of the unconscious mind was like looking pretty good, right. It was pretty clear. Light was coming through it in a way that wasn't distorted. And now we could look at, wow, things are pretty different now, right? As he's saying, no, it's okay what do you mean? I spent 10 hours of my weekend utterly wasting time. And what's wrong with that. Or he's rationalizing even that he likes to drink when he doesn't because he's so mad at himself. Like the defensive structure now is twisted. So we can say, okay, that's a big observation, right? And then the character structure, when we look at that, we find a person who's pretty good at figuring out and understanding things and coming right up to the precipice of change, but has a long history of then difficulty making the change. I know it, and I'm on the verge of it, but I can't bring myself to do it. That's in his character structure. Andrew Huberman: By the way, s uch a common thing. I mean, people that know better know they know better. Sometimes you almost have to wonder whether or not it's like a medication in the pocket. Like, they could take it if they wanted to. That might even give them some comfort. But they just don't do it. They just don't engage in the proper actions to move their life from one place to the next. Paul Conti: And if we look then at the level of strivings, he does know what he wants. He wants a feeling of contentment. It's really what he wanted was a feeling of contentment, a feeling of like, I'm taking good care of myself. I'm doing something that's of value. I'm enjoying doing it. He wanted those things. And even when we talked more, he had ideas of what jobs would do that in the beginning, he said he had no ideas. What he really meant that he said to me, but was also saying to himself, is, I have no ideas of jobs that would meet these requirements for me that pay as much as the one I have, right? But within him, which we got to where he knew that there were jobs that would make him happy. He just had to get over that they were lower paying. So think of what we learn about that. There's nothing lost in this man. There's nothing cut out of him. He's not damaged, he's not hopeless. And now he can understand that. He understands himself actually pretty well, right? And his conscious mind is apprehending pretty well what's going on and where he wants to go. But, boy, as he hasn't taken good care of himself, the defensive structure gets sort of warped. And then it makes it a lot harder to take care of yourself. It starts making other problems in life. And he starts feeling lousy about himself. Like, maybe I can't do much of anything right. Why? Because work isn't going as well. Because he's drinking too much and role performance goes down. So we can see that. And then what's of most interest there is that there's a character structure that can come right up to the precipice but not pull the trigger, so to speak, on what the thing the person wants to do. Because now we start getting, okay, an understanding of what's actually going on, right? And then if we look at function of self, let's look in those cabinets too, right? To help him be more aware of. There's an I here which he was pretty well aware of, but not enough. Like, there's a person here I'm shepherding through 24 hours in the day, right? Like, I am an I and I'm aware of what's going on inside of me. And it can make me happy or it can make me miserable. Let's be more aware of that. Andrew Huberman: How did he go about doing that? Because I find this first step within addressing the function of self awareness and really understanding that there's an I, there's a me, and I'm moving myself through life. I find this to be so interesting and on the one hand, kind of obvious. Like, okay, there's a me, like, tangible thing. You look in the mirror, you see yourself. But at the same time, it's a bit abstract, I think to me and to many people out there. How does one go about building up a sense of self in a way that provides positive agency in the world? Is it to tell? We hear all the time about these affirmations. And I'm sure there are people who look at themselves in the mirror and say, you are enough. And I'm not making fun of these people. Right? I actually have my own internal list that I tell myself on waking every morning, which has nothing to do with positive affirmation. It's just actually defining the different roles that I play. I don't know why this is useful to me, but I find it incredibly useful to me. It reminds me who I am. It also reminds or reassures me that I don't have any dementia yet. So we'll see going forward, but hopefully not. But yeah. Let's talk about this line of inquiry within the category of self awareness that people can do regardless of whatever challenges they might be having or not having. What does that look like and what do you think that accomplishes at the level of self understanding and agency in the world? Paul Conti: So one way of looking at that is, and it's not the words I would use, but what's pervading a person and sort of setting the stage? Which you can discern by inquiry. For example, in this case, the person. So there's a person who would really not think, this is okay. This person taking a job at 10% of the previous pay and the job has less prestige. Who's a person who would be very unhappy about that and very faulting of that. And talk to this person, my patient, through the lens of that, he should feel shame for that. That person's not alive. The person is not alive. So one way of looking at is what master are you serving. And a lot of the givens. The automaticity in him was as if that person was alive inside of him, really telling him how this wasn't okay. He was fighting that he wasn't aware that, hey, that's some other person's voice. He's like, no, I'm very, very conflicted about this. Actually, he wasn't very conflicted about this. When he starts focusing on the I, what do I actually think? What do I actually think? I don't care if I make 90% less. Like, I don't care. My needs are met. I put some money away. I want to be happy. I'm not conflicted. But in order to get there, we have to look at the I. How much is the I at center stage? I don't mean in some way of paying too much attention to the self, but we're all acting through the lens of the I, no matter what we're choosing. So to be aware of that and do I want to be impacted by the opinions of this other person? Because I can let someone else's opinions very much. I mean, we all do, right? Very much impact my thoughts. But I want to kind of decide that, do I really value that person's opinions? I don't want them automatically inside my head telling me how I feel about myself. Andrew Huberman: I can't tell you how many people I know come to me in a place of struggle, even though I'm not a clinician. And as I listen to what they're struggling with, it's so clear that they know the best answer and route forward, but that they're dealing with some internal, oppressive voice about whether or not they are a good person or a bad person, whether or not the choice they want to make is really a good choice at all. Sometimes those voices are the voices of parents in these particular examples, or the voices of peers. And so I think, if I understand correctly, what you're talking about is getting really firmly rooted in who a person is for themselves and what they really value and what they really know to be true for themselves and really trying to not necessarily quiet those voices, but see those voices truly as other, even though they come from within their head. Is that right? Paul Conti: Yes. To stop and think, what voices do I want inside? So maybe I want the voice of a kind mentor who still held me to account for a very high standard. It's a good voice to have inside of me. Andrew Huberman: A few of those. Paul Conti: But what might not be a good voice is like, say, a not so kind mentor for whom you could never do anything good enough. That's not so good. Or maybe you take part of that and you leave part of that. But the earlier and more formative the voices are, the more they're in our head automatically. Like, think about that man thought that he was deeply conflicted. Absolutely, 100%. And he was right. Like, his experience was to be deeply conflicted. But when you go in and dig, if you just dig and you get to like, okay, the I is going to assess this, he's not conflicted at all. Which is why then if you're coming up the function of self ladder and you look at defense mechanisms in action, and what's on top of that salience right now is when it creates an immediacy. So defense mechanisms in action sort of inform the process and say, hey, the defenses are shifting to denial, acting out. And that's what sort of gives us a time horizon, like this thing. This is not going to be okay. That if he kept down this path, what was very clearly going to happen. You don't have to roll the tape forward that much to see that he's going to lose his job. He's going to feel very ashamed of that. Like a bunch of negative things are going to happen. So it helps the person apprehend that there's something going on here. I'm changing, right. Because in some way I'm thinking now that it's okay that I'm wasting 10 hours on something that I could really enjoy if I spent 90 minutes on it. Whoa, I'm kind of losing a little bit perspective there. So it adds a sense like it frames the situation. And the salience of it. Andrew Huberman: Could you elaborate a little bit on this defense mechanism in action of acting out? I think we covered in episode one, and I'm sure we'll come up several times more during today's discussion about things like denial, projection, displacement, et cetera. Those defense mechanisms seem to have their own intrinsic definition. But acting out is something that we hear more and more about these days. Like, they're acting out. What is acting out? Is it acting out of some conflict? Is it trying to demolish a struggle by going and doing something else? Paul Conti: We can think of it as, by and large, an unhealthy manifestation of a lot of aggression, which could be a very high aggressive drive or an aggressive drive that's not too high, but is then furthered, its power is furthered by a negative situation. Say, like this one. Because the acting out, what was going on here inside of this person is he was very, very mad. And this isn't a person who expressed a lot of anger or had outlets for. He wasn't going and running 10 miles or this was all inside of him. He wasn't getting it out in one way or another. So what he starts doing is he starts acting out the anger. Now, he's angry at the world around him because he's unhappy in it, and it's not giving him more choices. Now, of course, this is about him and not the world around him. But he's feeling an anger towards the world that won't cooperate. Right. And he's angry towards himself. Because he can't make himself happy. Look at all of this. Look at all that he did, and look how miserable he is. So a way of acting out then is the drinking. Because the drinking is to hell with the world, right? You think I shouldn't be drinking at night and coming to work hungover? I'll do it anyway, right? To hell with the world. It's a way of snubbing his nose at the world. He's also snubbing his nose at him, right? To hell with me, right? The guy who now doesn't come across the way he did before, because I'm showing up at work, not in the responsible way I showed up before, but in a way that's a little disheveled. Function is lower. To hell with me. It's a form of self denigration. Like, let people think worse of me. Why? Because I'm so mad at myself that I think it's justified, right? And then there's also the inviting of, hey, if I really have an addiction problem here, I lose my job. It's like, fine, I deserve that too, right? There's an acting out against the self that if the person doesn't stop and look at that, that can become true, right? Because that person didn't really wasn't built to say to hell with the world and with me, or to not even understand that, what's the hell with the world mean? It also means to hell with me. And it's not good for the or me. But he was able to understand that because we would look at, like, wow, what shifted in you? This is a person who did a lot of sublimation before, who now all of that's going into acting out. So they're not taking negative energy and doing something good with it. They're taking negative energy and doing things that are bad with it. Why? Because there's too much. There's a lot of negative energy. It's overwhelming everything else. And then it's going down these pathways where the unhealthy defenses are always beckoning us. Send the energy down here. It's easier to avoid than it is to face something and figure it out. It's easier to just act out than it is to hold what's inside of us and then think about why it's there. So the unhealthy defenses are beckoning us. And for him to see you have had a healthy defensive structure, like, you can be healthy again. You're not broken, right? But to also see the way these defenses are going is bringing real risk to your ability to even be happier. You get further down the shame and loss path, it can be hard, sometimes impossible for the person to get back. So it sets the stage. Like, this is very, very important, what these defenses are, how they're being enacted, and for him to be able to see that, like, oh, this could be healthy, but it's not now. Andrew Huberman: Yeah. These slow, degrading forms of acting out and self sabotage and sabotage of others, I think, are the particularly dangerous ones because they're slow. And sometimes the change is imperceptibly slow. And then one day somebody arrives at a place where, as you said, they unfortunately can't get back, or it requires going into residential treatment or things that really big departures in order to get back into life. And I would never wish for somebody to choose to act out by driving off a cliff instead. But there are other forms of acting out that immediately wake people up. But it seems like people don't often select those. They select these more subtle forms of acting out where they don't get caught or no one's calling them out on it because plenty of people have five or six drinks at happy hour, right? As opposed to 50, right? So it's slow self sabotage as opposed to immediate self destruction. And again, we're talking about alcohol, but we talk about food, video games, social media, arguing with spouse. I mean, all of these kinds of things that build up over time to eventually deliver people to a place of real problems. I'm curious, for this particular individual you worked with, sounds like that's not what happened. They started this process of self inquiry around self awareness. And did you see that the salience that is what they paid attention to internally and externally immediately shifted and the defense mechanism of acting out immediately dissolved. I mean, what was the kind of contour and time course. Paul Conti: There was less. If we're looking in the cabinets, there's a lot in the defence mechanisms in action cabinet, there's not as much in the salience cabinet because this is the major thing on his mind right above all else. And he was having intrusive thoughts about it and his self talk was about it. But we kind of already knew that, just like we knew it was in the conscious mind. So if you think, where's the money at? It's not as much in that realm because he's aware of it. If he thought, oh, this isn't bothering me very much. And then he said, well, all his internal dialogue is about it, right then, okay, there's a lot to achieve there. But just as he brought a lot that was unconscious into the conscious mind, was aware of it, it was salient. There's less to do there because the things to understand and change are not residing so much there. Andrew Huberman: For people that are, no doubt everyone is thinking about their own internal processes and where they could ask better questions and arrive at better answers to help themselves along. Perhaps you could elaborate a little bit more on this salience cupboard under function of self. To me, salience is what's most apparent. As you talked about yesterday and again today, there's this internal narrative, like what's on my mind often or what kind of jumps to mind. I've started doing this recently based on our discussions here, and I've noticed that under different states of arousal. And here I'm talking specifically about sleepiness versus alertness type arousal when I wake up in the morning or when I'm tired in the evening, where my mind is at, where it defaults to and what I'm paying attention to throughout the day is that just asking myself to notice, and I've certainly noticed some patterns. For instance, I've noticed that anytime my overall state is elevated, more alertness, or in the middle of exercise, my mind goes to some not so pleasant thoughts. And it's interesting to me, it's like, wow, this is strongly correlated with states of internal arousal that are healthy. Exercise within a limited frame or exercise in general, if done in a healthy way, is healthy. And when I'm sleepy, those thoughts never come about. When I wake up in the morning, certain thoughts tend to leap to mind. Other thoughts know. So sort of categorization of different types of thoughts depending on my internal state. Is that the sort of line of inquiry that you're suggesting or describing here? Paul Conti: Yeah, I think it's quite half the picture, because half the picture would be what's going on in your mind when your mind is sort of at rest. What then starts playing itself right in your mind. The other side of it is what comes to the fore when there's a lot of competition for attention. So I'm making this up, but the idea that if he stubbed his toe really badly, he'd still be thinking about this. Because it's so much power. Now, again, maybe if, God forbid, he has a badly broken bone, there's a lot of pain, like he's going to think of that first. But it takes a lot of other stimulus to be more salient than this. So you can look at what's coming in your mind when your mind is sort of free and open, that's very, very important and relevant. And then what's winning out when there's maybe a high arousal state and a lot of competition for attention. Andrew Huberman: That's very helpful. Again, I think that along with this self awareness piece, the asking of oneself what is happening in my mind when I'm in different states or throughout the day, and as you're describing now, also including when there are other things available to think about. Does that include how often I'm distracted by a particular thought? Like how many times throughout the day my mind goes from the conversation I might be in to something else? Paul Conti: Yes. Does it hijack your attention? Is one way of putting that. Andrew Huberman: A lot of people mention to me challenges with intrusive thoughts. What can be done about those intrusive thoughts? Or is it simply a matter of paying attention to the fact that they're there and then thinking about the origins of those thoughts? Paul Conti: Right. Absolutely. One example, you could have intrusive thoughts because there's trauma in your background, maybe very clear trauma that you're not facing and addressing, and then you have intrusive thoughts that say, I'm not safe. Okay, go look for what's still in the unconscious mind. Or when it comes out a little bit, you push back into the unconscious mind. That's a very different scenario than, like, in this case. This man was having intrusive thoughts about his job situation, his overall situation, and it made sense that he was having those intrusive. They were markers of the acuity of it, of, like, you have to do something about this or something very bad is going to happen. So the intrusive thoughts there. And this made sense, right. This is not going well, and your mind is sort of forcing you to pay attention to this because time really kind of is of the essence. You're at real risk now. So intrusive thoughts can be anything from, as they often are, they can be markers of something that is traumatic, something that's underneath the surface, something that is really bothering us, that we've shoved down, that's making guilt, shame, distress, vulnerability. That's very often the case. But sometimes intrusive thoughts are a marker of like, oh, right. That's the thing to pay attention to. Andrew Huberman: And once we identify the intrusive thought, how do we eradicate it? I mean, how do we work with it? Talking about trauma now, of course, it might map back to a childhood experience, some internal narrative, but is there some roadmap for moving intrusive thoughts from a place of intrusive and disturbing to simply there and kind of, meh. I mean, it'd be wonderful to hit a delete switch, but obviously, we don't work like that. Paul Conti: Well, let's take a look, if we could, at this example, right, which is a little bit different if we run through this example of the person in the job, because then we should talk about trauma driven intrusive thoughts, which is, I think, in many ways, the biggest topic about intrusive thoughts. But think of this person here. If we go up from salience, we look at behaviors, right? And behavior actually now is very, very important, right. This person is drinking. They're still going to that job they don't want. They haven't gone and interviewed for the jobs they want. So we start looking at the behaviors that are making problems, the changes in behaviors that could make things better. And then on top of that, we arrive at strivings. And I think when I was talking about structure of self, I think at least one time I misspoke and said striving instead of self at the top of these pyramids, self and striving have a lot of overlap, right. Because if you're growing a healthy self out of the sort of top of the structure of self pyramid, then that self is going to be aware of strivings and it's going to be better able to enact them. So his sense of self was shaken here, but he was aware of the strivings for a better life. So now let's see the roadmap. It's interesting, right? Because the roadmap is his roadmap. If we look in those ten cupboards, we come up with a roadmap, and the roadmap doesn't have us spending very much time in unconscious land, right. Because he doesn't really need that. If we look at what makes the difference for him, what did we do? We really cultivated the self awareness, the I that is making decisions for him. We looked at how his defensive structure had changed and the things he didn't want to be there now and the good things that were there before, and how could he get back some of that? How could he trend back towards what was working before? So we start to really look at that and then we go from there really to changing behaviors. Like it requires a behavioral change, which is not to walk up to the precipice of doing this each day, but to actually do it, right. Because it was very clear all the vectors, so to speak, inside of him were pointing towards doing it. And that that was consistent with the self being healthier, that garden growing on top of the structure and the strivings then being realized. So for him, that was the roadmap and the salience, it wasn't really part of it, because the intrusiveness, the salience bias inside of him made sense. And then, of course, it went away once he made the decisions, right. Because the intrusive thoughts of, like, you have to figure this out. You have to figure this out. Weren't there anymore, along with the intrusive thoughts of, you'll never figure this out. It goes away because he made the change, but he made the change because we looked at self awareness and we strengthened self awareness. We looked at defense mechanisms, how they could be versus how they are. We looked at the behavioral change, which was really necessary. And then also referencing a character structure that has difficulty. Coming across the precipice. So we say, okay, that's a baseline characteristic of him. We kind of understand that. But how do we help him change the behaviors anyway? When he does that, the self is in a better, happier, healthier place. The strivings are realized. This person stops drinking in the way they were. They start doing the enjoyment aspects of their life. They start doing them within reasonable bounds again, they're taking care of themselves. Person's smiling and now think the generative drive is much more fulfilled. What comes on top of those pillars, right. Is that person has a sense of humility. Enough humility to say, I'm going to walk away from this job. It's okay that people in the job will think I'm crazy. How could you leave that? And it triggers something in me in some way. But it's okay. I'm not out there for that. I'm not out there for the big thing that everybody is guiding. I can have the humility to go to the job that I know makes a difference and feels good to me. He's empowered to make change. He's moving away from the disempowerment of the alcohol and the avoidance. So there's empowerment and humility and absolutely, if you talk to that person on the other side of it, like shortly as he was enacting it, right. Getting just to the other side of it, there was so much empowerment and so much humility, which were then brought to bear through a sense of agency that made the changes. That changed the job, that stopped drinking, that dealt with the people who thought negatively of it through a sense of gratitude of, it's not awful that I'm going to go make less money. A lot of people said that to him. Like, how could you do it? It was so terrible. It's not terrible. I'm grateful. You know what I'm going to do? I'm going to go make an amount of money. That's all that I need. So it was like, that's what helps a person do that thing. And that's actually true. That's what mattered to him. So an activated, an active, a verb, sense of agency and gratitude, then leads him to the place where there was at peace, contentment, delight. He was delighting in the job that he chose, and his generative drive was in accord with it. Then eventually, we stopped at some point, working together. He didn't need me anymore. He could always come back, but we didn't need me anymore. Then you look at. How are those last sessions? A lot of the last sessions were him in an excited way, telling me what he was doing, right. Like, oh, and then we did this, and I did this. I figured this out. He was so happy about it. And you can see that man's generative drive, which naturally is quite high in him, but was being squelched. That brings him out of balance. Now, the generative drive was in quite a good place, and he had enough aggression or assertion to go and do that job and to do that well, and even enough to counter anybody who would still kind of rise up and say, that wasn't a good idea. He could counter all that. He was getting pleasure from it. He didn't need to seek pleasure. By what? Not even pleasure? Because alcohol was pleasurable? No, pleasure. Because harming himself and saying, to hell with you, to the world, and to him was pleasurable. He's not getting pleasure that way. He's getting pleasure in healthier ways, taking care of himself, doing the job he loves, doing his leisure activities. Like, the man comes into balance, and then life is good. And when you say, yeah, okay, come back in a couple of months, comes back in a couple of months, maybe in six months. Comes back one more time, I don't see him again. That's great. He totally doesn't need me again. And I atrophied from his life. Great. That's the success state of it. Andrew Huberman: He eventually arrived at being truly wealthy with all the components of mental health and peace, contentment, delight. As you describe his story, which is a remarkable one, it occurs to me that the narratives that we hear as children end up being so powerful. Paul Conti: Yes. Andrew Huberman: And I'm sure there are people out there that receive such direct messages from their mother and or father. Like, you have to do this. You cannot do that. But often we get messages through observing and overhearing. Right. The way that our mother talks about our father when he's out of the room. The way that our father talks about our mother when she's out of the room. And some of this could be nonverbal, like a rolling of the eyes or somebody saying, yes, yes, agreeing, and then they walk out and they just. And kind of blowing them off. I mean, kids are, we are all so aware and integrating all of that all the time. And I do think those messages get woven into us at a very deep level. Paul Conti: Absolutely. Andrew Huberman: And then, of course, there are the conscious narratives that we build up as we go through in particular, I think, elementary and middle school and high school. I mean, I can still remember a negative comment somebody made about a jacket that I was wearing in, like, the third or the fourth grade. I forget everything else that happened that year. Remember that? Yeah. And I'm not insecure about the clothing that I pick. I mean, obviously it's a black button down shirt. I've had similar shirts since the first grade. Just kidding. But the fact that that's embedded in my memory systems is, like, just speaks to the salience of negative, of insults basically. It was an insult. And I'm sure I've insulted plenty of kids coming up as a teenager and back and forth, but these narratives get so deeply embedded. And the idea that one could pick a different path of vocation or, like, you miss the opportunity to be truly happy at a deep level based on these narratives. I mean, on the one hand, it's obvious. On the other hand, you just go like, whoa, this is not good. This is a flaw in the design. And yet you're giving us a roadmap to understanding and to overcoming it. Paul Conti: Right? Let's say we take your examples and we really look. They're great examples and we look at them, right? The person making fun of the coat in third grade. We're assuming it hasn't harmed you, it hasn't changed the course of your life. What does it tell us? It shows that negative stimuli are very salient. I'm sure you got a lot of compliments in third grade too, right? But it's the negative that stands out, which just shows that there's a salience bias in us towards the negative. And that's probably about survival and threat sensing. Like, in some ways it makes sense around human survival, but it doesn't make sense around human trauma. So you had given the example of what gets communicated to the child when, say, mother says something negative about father when father's out of the room. Father says something negative about mother when mother's out of the room. Just to give an example. So, children, because the complex cognitive mechanisms haven't been formed yet, right? Then the natural way that the brain functions is in a self referential way. So the child generally doesn't have the capacity to say, like, oh, mom and Dad aren't really getting along well in this certain way. So when Dad's not here, mom vents a little bit about something about him by saying. The child isn't thinking about that, right? Then what the child will often internalize is, okay, there's me and there's mom and dad. And mom says dad is bad, and dad says mom is bad. And I must be bad too, right? Because in general, if your parents are bad, then the child takes that on themselves. Now, again, I'm giving a simple example, but I'm very much extrapolating it. I mean, imagine if that were very, very aggressive where the mother, when this happens, just tells the child how awful the father is and the father does the same. Someone's not going to come out the other side of that being like, you know what? Maybe they're both awful, but I'm not. That's not how that goes. So the lessons, the traumatic lessons of childhood get internalized. And they don't even always have a solution state. So you think about the man who knew, like, okay, you have to go get this job. And all those things he internalized. You might say, well, I mean, he got to a good place for him. So for better or for worse, at least there was a place to go. To go work hard, go succeed. Go check this box you've been told you're supposed to check, but oftentimes there is no solution state. So how many children, I mean, it's terrible that this is such a high percentage of the work adult practitioners do is helping people who, as children were told one way or another that they were worthless, incapable, bad. That gets put into the child. Unfortunately, far, far... I mean, one time on the planet is too frequent, let alone how often this happens. Andrew Huberman: That example makes really good sense. And this is a question. Could we add to that the example whereby the child overhears examples of what say, men should be like or women should be like these things. It's not so much like, you did wrong Andrew or you did wrong Paul, or telling the daughter you screwed up. But it's more, again, narratives that we overhear, or even a parent showing delight or excitement about a certain phenotype in the world, like, oh, wow, look at that person, or look at them. Isn't she beautiful, right? That the young child thinks like, okay, well, then that's the epitome of beauty through the lens of the parent. Or, gosh, like this person. Then that child internalizes that this is the epitome of disgust with another human being. And I think children are so savvy without realizing it, it's like, okay, well, then I guess you move toward that and you aspire to that and you deflect from that. And you can see how these trajectories can be set very early on. I mean, these are the four lane highways that we were talking about in episode one, where just routes of neural processing that can bring us to choices in life and places in life that oftentimes you go like, I don't want to go down this path anymore. The exploration of early narratives, both direct and indirect, first person and third person, seem so critical. How does one go about that? I mean, clearly, with a trained clinician like you, you would guide somebody through the process. But if somebody were to try and do this in some sort of structured way for themselves, what do those lines of inquiry look like? Because we have vast number of experiences from childhood, but some messages are going to be more salient than others. Paul Conti: Sure. Yeah. The idea that reflective self scrutiny can help us, I think, is just a great idea. It's a great concept. And we do a lot of different things sort of inside, and we're guided to do a lot of things inside. But this, I think, should overshadow many, if not most of all those other things of what's really going on inside of me. Because if you think about it, a lot of people will come through that and they'll learn. So the person is told like, this is what beautiful is, this is what successful is, this is what good enough looks like. And that person may, through all sorts of experiences, maybe other people in their lives who are more balanced, be able to arrive on the other side of that even still sometimes going through the midst of it, depending upon age and situation, and know, like, okay, my father and mother thinks like, this is what beauty is, this is what success is. But it's one set of opinions, and there's not a set of opinions that are going to define me. Sometimes people get to that place, but a lot of times they don't. And they carry that lesson forward and they're not aware of it, right? So they think that they're very unattractive, even though other people are giving them different signals. They think that they're very dumb, even though other people are giving them different signals. And their own grades and their own success may be giving them different signals. But they're not putting the two things together. And that's going to generate tension. That might be why that person doesn't follow up on potential relationships. They just don't think they're good enough and the person's eventually going to reject them because of what they look like. They're taking that with them in this example from childhood. Or they're not satisfied with the job that in other ways is really great. They enjoy the work. They enjoy everything, but doesn't pay enough. Why? Because they have some false idea inside of what it's supposed to pay. Because it's what the parent said by self scrutiny. What are the givens? I always think it goes back to the math minor. If you can't solve the problem, go back and look at the givens. What are you taking for granted? Like, oh, I know that every time I see an X, that X equals four. Really? Maybe you wrote down four somehow because you were thinking of four at the time and X actually is a three. Right. Just go back and look at what you're taking for granted. And a lot of times this is what we're doing in the therapy process, and then that's when the person can realize. So I'm simplifying, but for the person to realize, like, oh, there's a voice in my head, so to speak. It's a natural voice. That is the voice of this person who may not even be around anymore, whose opinion doesn't mean to me what it did before, but that voice is saying, you're unattractive, you're not making enough money, you're not good enough. And you know what? I don't believe that they can identify that. And then it doesn't happen all at once. But you can get it out of you. Generally, you don't get it out of you unless you realize that it's there. Andrew Huberman: What is the process of getting it out? Because I think that we all have the capacity to remember certain things and to arrive at a place where we can understand. Okay, I'm taking for granted the fact that there's a voice in my head that says blank. Actually, I have a brief anecdote to say about this, and this isn't I have a friend thing. I literally have a female friend who the other day called me laughing and crying because she was being evicted from her apartment. And she told her mother about this over the phone. And her mother's response was, well, at least you're thin. Paul Conti: Wow. Andrew Huberman: And she was laughing and crying about it because it reflected so much of her childhood that no other accomplishment of having a job, having an apartment, et cetera, mattered. It was about one thing. It was about a certain form of aesthetic beauty that I'm not even sure she subscribes to, even though she happens to be thin, right? So the fact that her mother would lift that from the conversation, there's such a deprivation of so many things in that interaction. But it really wasn't about that interaction. She was calling me because it was really about her entire childhood, right. And obviously, I'm not equipped to solve the problem. And it wasn't a request for money or anything of that sort. It was almost like the hilarity and the sadness of the whole picture, right? But again, it speaks to these narratives that we internalize and that sometimes show up in very glaring ways in the real world. It's like to hear that, I think, was shocking to her. I think she needed to tell me to, is this real? But then it was clear that that message had existed in her head for a long time anyway. Paul Conti: That could be very pivotal if she realizes that, right? And even the power of the humor of it is like, this is absurd, right. That can be very powerful in creating change, because if there's some vestige of that inside of her where she still believes, like, oh, I'm not good enough because I achieved A, B and C, but I don't look like X or whatever, it can very much help because there's a lot of power behind realizing that absurdity of, like, oh, my, that's bizarre. But wait, is any of that inside of me? Am I carrying some of that with me? I mean, there's an incentive for self scrutiny through what you're describing, because what's the ideal amount of that to still be in her? Zero. Andrew Huberman: So as one comes to realize, the messages they've heard, or perhaps, like, in this case, that they're still hearing, is the process of overcoming those messages and really arriving at the self. It sounds to me like it's a two part process, at least two part process. It's to look in the bin of what are the givens? What am I taking for granted about the internal narratives and thinking about their origins in childhood or elsewhere, but then also cultivating the self awareness piece that's under the function of self. Like, wait, what's really true for me at the level of me? And this is really, I think, about separating out the voices in one's head, these internalized narratives from the person that we really truly are. Paul Conti: Because the idea is that those two pillars encompass everything we need to look at. Those ten cupboards encompass everything. So it's all that. The person who's going and looking at the givens, they're trying to understand what might be in my unconscious mind that I'm not aware of. And, wow. The last time I got this big award at work, I had this reflexive thought of like, but you're not thin enough. Wow. Whoa. Right? There could be a process, like, that's going on inside of me. I don't want that going on inside of me. So the process of trying what is unconscious in us that may be causing us harm, which is often where, that's where the trauma goes, right. It's where the childhood trauma seats itself, which brings us back around to the intrusive thoughts. Intrusive, negative thoughts. A negative self dialogue usually does not mean what it meant to the man who need to change jobs, right. Because they were there for a good reason. Then he needed to make change more often. The vestiges, the hangover, the lingering badness of some prior trauma. So oftentimes when you think, we talked a little bit yesterday about the person who was driving in the car and just telling themselves over and over that they're a loser, right? And then they can't achieve the things that they achieved when they stopped doing that. I'm simplifying a little, but that's the basics of it. Because the intrusive thoughts, the self narrative, all the negativity in us is often coming from places that are in the unconscious mind, right? Not always. But this idea that I don't think I'm good enough, I'm saying it to myself over and over again, like, wow, let's go back and look at why. Because the answer to that, again, lies in a different place. There's just a different roadmap, right? The man who needed to change jobs had a roadmap that spent a little bit of time in the I, self awareness. And then it went through self defense mechanisms in action land, and it spent a lot of time with behavior, and then it got up to the strivings. That's his roadmap. Whereas for someone who's laboring under the intrusive thoughts, the negative self talk, the automaticity, the givens of childhood trauma then needs to go to a different place where now we're spending time in the unconscious mind thinking about what's there, figuring out what's there, bringing things to consciousness. That person, say, realizing maybe your friend, you had this realization of, like, oh, my goodness. We say, wow, did that bring something to the conscious mind in her. If so, great, let's look at that and let's look a lot at it and let's look. Are there other things there too? Are there other givens? Let's bring them to conscious, to consciousness so that we can talk about them, we can identify them, and then look at how does that relate to defense mechanisms and character structure? And now what are we doing? A process of interested inquiry like this is really interesting. I mean, it should be interesting to the person doing it. It's them, right? And it should be interesting to the person doing it with them, right? Because if you're a therapist and it's not interesting to you, you need another job, right? Or you're talking to a friend. Like if it's a friend is going to be interested. So there's an interested, honest, open inquiry with the idea of holiday . Let's learn things so that we can make change for the better. And even though, as we talked about yesterday, the intrusive thoughts and the self dialogue that's gone on over and over and over again, it doesn't go away easily, but that doesn't mean it doesn't atrophy over time and go away. Or that the person can have that reflexive thought like, oh, there's the thought again that I'm a loser or that I should cut myself or I should drink or whatever it is. I know that thought appears in me automatically at times because it was in my head for so long, but it does not telling me anything, it's just an automatic thought. It's not telling me I should drink, it's not telling me anything, right? Other than the fact that, oh, that's what happens in human beings. That's how the self understanding brings change in us and gets us over the barriers of why i've been trying this for what modern mental health would often have us think. I took the Silexan, I did the ten sessions of CBT. I'm a failure. Nothing will ever get better. A different framing that says, hey, this can get better over time. And my understanding and my efforts and my thought redirection, my behavioral changes all makes it better. And then those things I don't want in my head, they're going away. It's taken time, but they're going away. Andrew Huberman: I'm relieved to hear you say that one can have intrusive thoughts and that one approach to dealing with those is to acknowledge them and look at them and not try and push them back deeper, not try and eradicate them. I'm familiar with having intrusive thoughts, not all the time, but at various periods throughout my life. And the idea that one can just extinguish them is a great idea, but that's simply not the way it's worked, at least not for me. But I have found that if I just say, okay, this is spontaneously coming up through the neural circuits of my subconscious, and they're intrusive, and I don't like them, but I eventually arrive at exactly the place that you describe, which is that there's nothing actionable here. They go from being intrusive and troubling to intrusive and just kind of mildly irritating to intrusive. And like, okay. And yes, I go through some redirect, like, try and redirect my attention from time to time when they're happening, but I eventually just get to a place where it's like, okay, it's just a boring story or boring imagery. There's nothing there. There's nothing there. And then they eventually break up like clouds. That process could take a while because... Paul Conti: You took the energy out of them, you made them go away, which happened over time. And then the energy that was so powerful becomes less and less and less. And what happens? They dissipate, they atrophy. That's how they go away, because there's no more power. There's no more power in them. And that really is the way that we make change. And I think your emphasis upon the fact that it takes time, the fact that it takes effort, the fact that it only goes away slowly. Over 20 years of, at times, being a therapist, what I've seen the most daunting, the thing that makes people just give up and go away and go back to the things that hurt bad, give up on themselves, are that it takes time. And if you think it's supposed to take two weeks, and the world around you is kind of leading you to think that, and then you go for help, and the help kind of leads you to think that whether it's two weeks or it's ten weeks, if it's going to take two years, you're going to go away disheartened. Or maybe more angry at yourself or maybe demoralized. So we have to look at the truth of all of this, parallel to your story. In my own life, for years and years and years, I carried a negative voice inside that was always waiting for me to do something wrong. So if I say something that's a little bit off or not exactly what I want to say now, it would say, like, that wasn't good. It says something negative inside to me, or it's waiting for me to drop something and say that I'm stupid and clumsy, right. With me all the time. But over time, through self reflection, through therapy, like, through a lot of hard work, but a desire for things to be better and a desire to understand it, it's not there anymore. I mean, every now and then, it'll raise its head, right? I'll do something. Really? I dropped a cup of coffee. I haven't done it in ten years, and it made a mess, and now people are coming to clean it up, and, man, the voice came back, right? But I could recognize it. I really feel bad about this. And now it gives that voice a chance to come out, but it doesn't come out much anymore. Whereas I lived with it for years, it doesn't come out much anymore. And when it came out not that long ago, I could recognize it. I'm not happy I did this and let me help clean it up, but it doesn't mean I'm an idiot, right? So the voice in my head can just go away, as I've been helping it to do for a bunch of years now. Andrew Huberman: Yeah. I think also important for people to understand is that it takes time, but that we can all potentially engage in, right, actions, moving towards strivings and hopefulness as we cope with those and try and diminish those internal narratives, those intrusive thoughts. It's not as if during the entire process, you can't function. I mean, I think that it's cognitively and sometimes even physically demanding to do, but we can still engage in healthy ways in the world, and we can still try and avoid acting out and avoid forms of denial. As I say this, I'm realizing that the wish for or the impulse to really just suppress intrusive thought born of trauma or whatever else is really futile. That's not going to work. It's not going to work. We have to embrace these narratives and not expect them to disappear in a finger snap, but embrace them and see them and look at them and be unafraid to look at them and discount where they are. Absolutely not true. Paul Conti: I would say unafraid to understand, right? Because we must understand means we must look at what's going on inside of us. When I didn't like that voice but was afraid of it, like, what is going on inside of me? What does this say about me? And I'm directing away from it. Well, that's why it was with me for, like, several decades. But when I start to go look at it, I can find an answer to it. And again, you have to look at what's going on in that person because one might presume, and maybe people listening are presuming this or maybe not, but a reasonable presumption that might just reflexively happen in a person would be to think that, oh, when I was younger, the messaging I was getting was that you're not good enough. Right? You're not good enough. That's why I carry with me, you're not good enough. But it's not that sometimes it's the opposite, that I was rewarded a lot when I was younger for doing things in a way everyone thought was great. Like getting great grades and being well behaved, doing all sorts of things that brought a lot of positive reinforcement to me, but I never handled well things that fell even a little bit short of that. And then it would evoke a lot of shame. So the oppression inside is not coming from denigration, it's coming from something different. Which is also why this is not a search to blame someone. Because sometimes the people who are giving the message, they're doing the best they can. I mean, someone who's saying to a child, you're a loser, like, that's not okay. No matter what, that's not okay. But that's often not how it happens. The parent, like you says, communicating, they don't realize that every time they're admiring a certain level of wealth or a certain kind of beauty, they're giving that message that the child that doesn't meet that or ends up not meeting that isn't good enough. But they don't know that. Or my parents tried to nurture me and they did a good job of it in many ways, and teachers did a good job. So they're not realizing, hey, this person's going to end up a bunch of years from now not thinking anything's good enough. They don't know that. So it's not a search for blame. And I think that's very, very important. Very important. Because often people don't want to look inside because they think either I'm going to find something dramatically wrong with me, and the answer I would give is there's almost surely not something dramatically wrong with you if you're having that thought. And if somehow there is, you're better off looking at it now than later. So that's part of it. The other part is that people become worried that they're going to ruin something. I like my parents and if I go look at this, I'm going to hate them. People say things or think things like that. And the idea that we may get down to something that really involves someone being responsible for something bad, now, if that's the truth, the person already knows that inside. The vast majority of times, they know that they're just not facing that. But most of the time also, it's not that. It's just like, okay, that's how life evolved. And what's the predisposition? Like, I was smart enough to get good grades, and I have a low threshold for shame, and people reinforced me and like, oh, I can kind of understand that, so then I can get control over it. It's not a search for anger, frustration, blame of self or others. Andrew Huberman: Yeah. Oftentimes I hear that people are afraid of dealing with these deeper issues or addressing these deeper issues for fear that they'll lose, say, their drive. Right. The thing that makes them successful in the first place. And that allows them perhaps even to afford therapy or afford the time to think about these sorts of questions. So it seems to me that the drives that you referred to earlier, the generative drive, the aggressive drive, and the pleasure drive, are such critical nodes or areas to look for all of us in terms of figuring out whether or not we're doing well or less well according to some features that are pretty much universal in people. Essentially what I'm saying is, at least by my understanding, we all have drives to some extent or another. And to the extent that our aggressive drive is very high and pleasure drive is very high, and whether or not it's pointed in the right direction, it can be generative. If it's not, perhaps it can undermine our generative drive. I'm very curious to know how you've observed the different ranges of these drives in people and how that predicts whether or not people will do more or less well in different areas of life, essentially how the different drives play out. Paul Conti: I think that the first thing to say is where the drives are at, so to speak, in any of us is a combination of nature and nurture. So the nature part tells us the range, sort of that the drive is going to be. But because nurture means so much to humans, as we understand from epigenetics, from the advancement of science, we see more and more and more how much nurture matters. So the range that's denoted by nature is probably pretty broad. We see the manifestation of that, and then the nurture lets us then move that drive. Now, sometimes nurture, that's not gone in the right place can move the drive in the wrong direction. But as adults, as people who can take care of ourselves, who can learn about ourselves, we can change where the drives are seated. It's not an easy thing to do because it requires a lot of changes of self knowledge and hard work. But we can do it. We can change the sort of array of how those drives are manifesting themselves within us. And we see that, I mean, that's part of the hopefulness of mental health treatment, right? That we see not just surface changes, but we can see changes on a deeper level. So I think it's important that these things are not fixed. Although there are some natural elements. Someone who may have a natural sort of low aggression or low self assertion, okay, it's going to be in the lower range, but it doesn't mean that it's locked in at any one particular point. And that the place that we want to be, what is the place that's consistent with the things that we want, the agency and gratitude as verbs, and the sense of well being and all of that. So the idea is the state of health has the generative drive as prominent. It's the dominant drive, and then aggression and pleasure, which are still active in us, but they're subserving the generative drive, and that's the state that we wish to be in. So when we're assessing, okay, why is there something that doesn't feel okay or something that's not going okay, then? One way to start is to look at, okay, what's going on in the person, what may be off in the drives. That gives us a very strong idea of, okay, what's going on. A way of understanding what's going on as we then go and look in the ten cupboards to figure out the specifics, okay, what is actually going on here that we can then change, but the framing of what's going on can come through the lens of looking at the drives and how they're manifest in us. Andrew Huberman: What does it look like when the aggressive drive is very high and the pleasure drive is also very high? Paul Conti: So if these drives are running too high, where we end up at is in a place of envy and envy. I'm always sort of on the soapbox about envy, because I think envy is just so wildly destructive. And if the aggressive drive is very high, so the person say, in one way this can manifest itself, just wants more and more and more. They're not getting satisfaction from anything, but they want more. That may be because of a strong vulnerability inside of them. So something that might map to narcissism, for example. There could be a strong aggressive drive to get more, and that leads to something that's very unhealthy. So the idea that I want more, I need more, I don't have enough, I can't get enough, then fosters envy, which is not the desire to be better or to have more, but it's just the desire to feel better about the self, whether that involves raising the self up or bringing someone else down. That's why envy is destructive. So very high levels of aggression that are not tempered, for example, by a generative drive that would also be high, then create a circumstance of envy, and the envy is destructive. And the same happens if the pleasure drive is very, very strong. So if one continues to want more pleasure. So I can't find any satisfaction. I don't feel good about myself. I feel bereft inside. And I see that pleasure can make me feel better, but just for a little bit. Then it fades away and I want more of it, and I want more of it. That also can lead to the place of envy. Like that's the outcome. So if the aggressive drive is running very high, or the pleasure drive is running very high, or if both are running very high, but it only takes one in order to end up in a place of envy. So if the generative drive is not high enough to overcome how high the aggressive drive is, which would mean then the aggressive drive would be sublimated towards good, productive things. So take the energy and put it towards something that is goodness. But if the aggressive drive was way out there ahead of the generative drive, that ends up in a place of envy, as does the pleasure drive. If I want more and more and more, but I never get satisfaction from anything, it never brings me any sense of goodness that where it ends is in a place of vulnerability and resentment. Because envy involves wanting more. If we look at what's really going on, envy under the surface involves wanting everything, right? If a person is at the outer limits of envy, which is why envy is so destructive. Because if I can't get enough pleasure and there's so much aggression in me, then I'm not going to make myself feel better. But what I can do is make other people feel worse. Andrew Huberman: I want to ask you more about envy. But first I want to ask is one way to characterize the generative drive and to distinguish it from the other drives is to say that generative drives are pro social, meaning they tend to bring about benevolent interactions between people in. Paul Conti: The sense that pro social as constructive, right? In a sense, building goodness, then yes, because it's the drive in us that makes us want to love and nurture things. That makes us want to learn and sometimes learn to make better in the world or learn for learning's sake. The drive is a drive of goodness. So if the drive is then going to enact itself in the world around us, it's going to be pro social, because we exist as social units. I mean, if we decide, oh, I want to be an island off somewhere, that's not healthy, right? We exist in social units from small, like a nuclear family to a neighborhood, all the way up to nations and to the planet. So if we perceive the truth of that, that, hey, there's an interdependence between me and others, and I see that then the drive will lead to choices and behaviors that are socially constructive. Andrew Huberman: Earlier, you talked about aggression, and you were clear to make sure that we all understood that aggression does not necessarily mean violent aggression, that there are different forms of aggression. I'm curious if you could give us some examples of how you've observed people with high levels of aggression and high levels of pleasure drive as well, both male and female, and here, without defaulting to stereotypes. I think a lot of people just despite the fact that you've clarified what aggression is and isn't in the context of this conversation, we hear the word aggression and we think verbal attack, physical attack. However, the way you're describing aggression and the aggressive drive, I have a feeling that you're referring to other expressions of aggression as well. Paul Conti: So if the aggressive drive is running too high, and that could have factors of nature, factors of nurture, factors of the situation the person is in, factors of their whole life, but it ends up at the moment in a place that is too high, then what that person is doing in one way or another is to try and exert an unhealthy level of control. And that can be done in so many different ways. It can be done in that overt way of just intimidating people. Of using harsh language towards people. It can be done by manipulating people. It can be done through passive aggression. There are all sorts of ways that the person can try and exert unhealthy control, but that's where we end up. If there's too much expression of the aggressive drive in us, Andrew Huberman: That makes sense. And it reminds me of an example from my own life, where, first off, I should say I've had almost exclusively positive collaborations among my colleagues at Stanford and elsewhere. Every one of those collaborations has ended in a paper that we were all happy with. But more importantly, the relationships grew and were not diminished. But I had one collaboration with someone, not to be named, where it was going very well, but I had the need to reschedule an appointment. So I sent ahead a note about the fact that my car dealing with. I had some other things. I explained why I need to reschedule the appointment and didn't receive a reply, which was a little unusual, but then eventually received a reply that said, well, it's clear that you don't want to pursue this collaboration, which is like the furthest thing from the truth, right? And so I expressed that, and then the collaboration was reinstated. But it brought to mind some concern for me because it was sort of an extreme reaction to something that happens among academics or anyone we get busy with. Things come up. It was important to tend to the car, that is. And then at some point later, they were late to a number of meetings. Okay, no big deal. We're academics, we tend to run late. That's typical of many academics. But then I was late once to a meeting, and they essentially left and wrote an email that said something of the sort, like, I've got my own great ideas, so I'm no longer interested in pursuing the collaboration. And I was pretty shocked, because there was nothing really outside the ordinary in terms of busyness and prefaceorial schedules, and there were other people involved, postdocs and things like that. And there was a great project to be worked out. So I remember being disappointed, but also really kind of surprised. But then when I mapped it back to the earlier example of the car incident, I thought, well, there's a real sort of lack of ability of this person to handle disappointment, and yet they're exerting or demonstrating rather some of the same behavior, of occasionally running tardy and these kinds of things. And I remember feeling like it was pretty aggressive. It's a pretty aggressive reaction to something that could have been handled with a conversation. Now, I must say I'm very grateful that the collaboration didn't proceed and it went elsewhere and it worked out great, and they're doing great and we're doing great, and so, no hard feelings, but it stands out to me as a pretty salient example of aggression, but not played out at the level of yelling or anything. There's a passivity in there, but then there's also kind of a kind of entitlement. And here, of course, I'm only looking at the other person's behavior. And I should acknowledge, I realize canceling, not good. Being late, not good. But listen, I'm a human being, and I... Paul Conti: You canceled once. You were late once. This isn't habitual. This is human stuff. Right? Andrew Huberman: Right. And a lot of good work had gone into the project, and there was a cost where, most importantly, the postdoc suffered because they weren't involved in these interactions at all. And yet the project halted at that point. So to me, that seems like an example of somebody who has a, well, strong, aggressive drive. And that's clear from that they are incredibly successful in the academic domain. And when disappointed, lashes back or is passive, one or the other. Is that what we're getting at here? Not surprisingly, perhaps, the person rarely publishes with other people. Paul Conti: Right. Andrew Huberman: Probably that doesn't make a very good collaborative partner. Paul Conti: Right. And it totally makes sense. Think about what you're describing here, which is some vulnerability in the person. There's some way in which the person doesn't feel good enough, no matter what this person has achieved. So then there's a sense of the need and the right to over control. So when you agree to work together, you didn't agree that I'll never have to cancel anything. Right? Sure. But the thought was different, the framing is different on the other end, that now we're going to work together. So I'm exerting significant control over you. And again, you're not aware of it. And maybe that he's not aware of it. Andrew Huberman: In this case, it was a she. Paul Conti: Okay, so I was thinking of someone different, but she has to have some deficit of self that results then in the reflexive need to over control. And think about the first response is a non response. Which is, that's aggression. But it's just passive aggression. The thought would be, well, you're worried something doesn't feel good in you because I didn't respond, which was true.. You're expecting a response, maybe you don't know. Did you get the email? What's happening? Is she mad? So it's sort of effective. It creates some consternation and some dissonance in you. Then on top of that, the person is willing to potentially, at that point, sacrifice the relationship. So you think about aggression now is not good. This excess aggression is not good for you. It also is clearly eclipsing the generative drive. Because it's not good for this person and their research. It's not good for this person and the postdocs in their lab. But the person is willing to accept that in the service of gratifying the excess in aggression. Now, so then you said something that then sort of made it okay. For the short term. Okay. Then the person feels gratified, like, whether you apologize or not, they took it as you've, to some degree, bowed down before me now, like, it'll be okay, at least for the short term. But then the next thing that happens actually does end the collaboration. So that's not good. And you say, even from a self serving perspective, that person was collaborating with you for a reason. She saw a benefit to the science that she's very, very interested in through the collaboration with you. But then let that all go in the service of what? In the service of the ego. Of, I don't feel good enough about myself. The response to that then, is a response of envy. That I don't like that you have the freedom to behave differently than I want you to. I don't like any of it. I don't like that I don't control you as much as I would like to. And ultimately, it's that envy that becomes destructive. So it's a setback for that person. It's destructive of the science that person was doing. It's destructive of the science that you were doing. So envy is destructive. And here, the high level of aggression, the aggressive drive, is at a very high place. It's exceeding the generative drive. The pleasure drive isn't high enough either, because there's not enough pleasure coming from the great science that's being done, right? So then the person is approaching the world through the lens of envy, right? They don't feel good enough. They want to exert that aggression through over control. And what they end up doing is destructive, right? And it's very clearly destructive. It's a great example because it's destructive of the science, which is ostensibly the reason that you're there, right? It's the reason you were there. But someone who needs to exert over control is there, not just for that reason. And then the other reasons can trump the generative reason that they're there. And that's how envy, when it is the product of aggression or pleasure seeking, being too high, always unfailingly creates destruction. And how different is that from agency and gratitude as active verbs. There's a sense of agency, but the agency isn't being exactly enacted, because if the agency is being enacted in the service of science or career or whatever it may be, that's not going so well, right. And the gratitude part isn't active. Like, my goodness, I'm here, I have this great career. I'm discovering things. I get to spend my life in science. I get to collaborate with you. There's so many things to feel good about. I have postdocs in my lab, right? I get to nurture them because I know more and I can guide. That's not leading. Envy is not those things, which is why people who are doing that, at least in this realm of life, although this often this bleeds into other realms of life, the vast majority of times you see, is someone who does not have happiness in the way that happiness with the quotes. That happiness is the sense of peace, the sense of well being, right? Being able to delight in things, contentment. The person doesn't have that. And here it's interesting, right? This person gets to the highest levels of academia, and they're very successful, and they have a lab of their own, and they're collaborating. You think that's all great, right? But not inside of them. It's not bringing them those things, as evidenced by how this person is behaving. And I would bet almost 100% if you say, what's that person like in other aspects of life, at least in the professional realm, probably in others, too. No one's going to describe a happy person. Andrew Huberman: So much of what you just said captures this individual extremely well. And it also reminds me that so much of the way that you're describing this aggressive drive can also be observed, perhaps in the way that people show up to social interactions, not necessarily big interactions, maybe even just interactions between two people. What I'm thinking of here is the person, male or female, who shows up and just kind of takes over, talks the whole time and tells stories. I went to a meal when I graduated university, and someone showed up for the first time at this meal, meaning we had never met them before, and just sat down and just started telling stories for like an hour. And it was interesting. Portions of it were captivating. And then at some point I realized this is either total pathology. Like, this person is crazy, but they weren't crazy, or they have no recognition that they're absorbing all the oxygen in the room, as it's sometimes described. But it seemed like they had this need to just control the whole environment by way of speech, just like fire hose stories. And I've seen this definitely in the academic realm. I've seen this in the non academic realm, in social settings. What's interesting is perhaps why this person does this or these people do this. But what's also interesting is how people react to it. On the one hand, I think most people find that kind of obnoxious, but there also seem to be people who see this as like, oh, that person has a lot of agency. Like they're a leader. They actually grab a lot of the attention that they're seeking. And we tend to view those people as kind of empowered. I don't actually think that they're necessarily empowered, but perhaps it stems from the feeling that the rest of us, I like to think, have, which is some sense of social etiquette, where there's some give and take. You walk into a room, you kind of assess what's the context here. There's some listening as well as some speaking and so on. When someone shows up and kind of violates all those rules, on the one hand, it can be obnoxious and overtake everything. But as it said before, there's also the sense of like, oh, that must be nice to just be able to be as one feels. And so I'm describing this not because I think people should mimic this type of behavior either way, be really meek and not say anything that's on their mind or just overtake, but because I feel like it might be an exploration of this aggressive drive. And if someone's doing that, are they trying to mask something else? And why do people react to these seemingly powerful people in this way? Paul Conti: These things happen in the world around us, right? They're independent of the spectrum of gender, the spectrum of intelligence, achievement. They're human problems. So a person you're describing, whether that person has character structure, problems that are present with them across time, or whether they're in a certain place, whether it's in life or today, we don't know for sure what the underpinnings. But what you're describing is it's a presentation of narcissism. And narcissism is rooted not in confidence, not in arrogance. It's rooted in vulnerability. It's rooted in I don't feel good enough. And narcissism then engages with the world through the lens of envy. So no one else gets to have any time. No one else gets to say anything funny. No one else maybe gets to say anything at all. There's a dominance of the room, right? There's a dominance of the room that comes through an inability to tolerate the back and forth of human interactions, human engagement. So then that person becomes very dominant. And why is that? Because when they tell a story and they get a laugh or even if it's not that funny and it's a 15 minute story, but somebody smiles a little bit or nobody smiles. They can perceive inside that. Like, I just did that, I said that. And maybe somebody responded positively. I feel good about that for a split second. Now that's gone. And then the next thing comes, and the next thing comes, because people who are coming at the world through the lens of narcissism, whether it's just in that particular event or it's across life, are never satisfied. And nothing ever brings enough goodness, nothing ever brings enough feeling of pleasure. So the person then wants more, and that's how the person dominates the room. Now that can be very seductive. Narcissistic people, not always, but are often very seductive because of that appearance of mastery, of control. So that person did have, we could look at it in the short term and say that person had mastery over the room. No one said anything for an hour but them. So they had mastery over the room. They had control over the room. But what they're doing is exerting over control. It's like Pennywise and Pound Foolish, right? That borrow a dollar today to pay back 100 tomorrow. Because they got to control that room. But a lot of people, not everyone, some people are seduced by it. But a lot of people will take away from that something that's not a good feeling, something that wasn't mutual, that doesn't make a person want to collaborate with that person, even be in the same space as that person. So it's counterproductive because the people who might come under the spell, so to speak. They're the people who were brought under the spell, right. They're less observant, dynamic, intuitive, introspective. They're not the people that you want, in a sense, on your side. The people that would be most valuable to collaborate with, even as thought partners have conversations with those people are going to be put off because even if they don't know exactly what's wrong, they know, like, that didn't feel good and they map, do I want that feeling more in my life? No. So that's the counterproductive aspects. That's why narcissism is destructive, because you might say, well, there's nothing destructive in that interaction, but again, you have to be standing so up close to it that you don't see the bigger picture. Because when you stand back from that, that's not a person who's, by and large, you see that's not a person who's interconnected in the world around them, has a group of good, supportive friends, has a bunch of colleagues where they can sort of exchange information, because all that social dynamic has to happen in the rest of life. So you're seeing a situation that is counterproductive, that is destructive. And you always see that when people are enacting narcissism, whether it's okay, a bunch of bad things have happened, and for whatever reason, like, I'm in an unhealthy place and I'm enacting it right now, or if I'm enacting it every day of my life, because it's in my character structure and I haven't recognized and changed it, it's always destructive. Andrew Huberman: The narcissists that I've known and observed almost always seem to have a partner who clearly supports their narcissism, or at least doesn't speak up very much against it, at least not publicly, and not much else except a professional role. In fact, there's one scientist who I did not work with who comes to mind, and the joke about him was always that this person would talk about themselves endlessly for the first half hour that you run into them and say, okay, well, enough about me. Why don't you tell me about me? This person, moved to a different country with their partner, comes back every once in a while, has essentially done nothing over the last decade or so, kind of left the field, and it's kind of secretly the laughingstock of the field. There was one other anecdote about this person. I'm not picking on them. I'm just trying to explore these dimensions of aggression and low pleasure drive and envy. At lab meetings, it was well known that they would host a basketball game, but it was well known that you did not want to score on this person because you would be asked to leave the lab. And Indeed, several people were asked to leave the laboratory for having embarrassed the lab head at one of these lab events. Paul Conti: By participating in exactly the event that was described in the way it was described and doing something competent, right? Andrew Huberman: So the game was essentially a way for the person to build themselves up, and they were a mediocre, at best, basketball player. So here's this game where everyone's expected to pretend, right? And I have to pretend that the person is actually better at what they do than they are. And in some ways, it feels like a replica of how narcissism shows up in so many other areas of life. Like you said, these people are rarely surrounded by people who are actually very bright, self effacing, et cetera. They tend to gather people that just support them or no one at all. Because no reasonably healthy person would choose to be around that. Paul Conti: Because that game is a metaphor for all of life for that person. It's sending that message, like, see this message and extrapolate it out to everything else. What's the metaphor? What's it communicating? It's communicating that you don't do anything better than I do. You don't rise above me interestingly, right? You don't arise above me in any way. You don't get to know things I don't know. You don't get to do anything better than I do or I will be destructive towards you. It's fascinating because it's not about the game. The game is a way of communicating that message. Interesting. The person's not even that good at the game. Like why not choose something you're really good at. Because then the message is not communicated as clearly. And a lot of this is unconscious. Let's choose something I'm kind of fair to middling at, right? And then make it very clear that no one gets to be better or I do something destructive to them. That's exactly what that is. And imagine someone is thrown out of the lab. I mean, this is in many ways the biggest thing in their life or one of the biggest things. Andrew Huberman: Antigenerative. I mean, the cost of that in the larger world is one less potentially fantastic scientist, right? Paul Conti: And that's always the broader picture because the narcissist is standing very, very close to the tapestry, right? So the interaction there is you have squared a basket when I have not. So you don't understand the message that you're not supposed to exceed me. And now I will get rid of you because you're dangerous to have around. Because you don't get the message and you may exceed me in other ways. And also I'm going to feel better because I have the power to be punitive, even though it's wantonly punitive. And completely unjustified. But I have the power to do that and it'll make me feel good than to push you away. And I know that's not going to be good for you and I'll feel good about that. But that doesn't last, of course. That's why the person continues to do it. And it also doesn't understand at all that that's not good for science or most importantly, that's not good for me. There's a graduate student in that lab because you didn't say fire the graduate student, make the graduate student leave if the person wasn't good. No, it's make the graduate student leave no matter what. So the person is doing things that are injurious to the society around us, obviously to the specific person they're targeting, and also to themselves. And that's where, if you follow envy and you see high levels of it in situations that are unbounded. It's like this situation is unbounded in the sense that the person can do that. There's no higher authority. Andrew Huberman: This is changing. And by the way, I should back up a second and say that I do believe, and it's been my experience, that most scientists and lab heads are not narcissists, are quite kind, are benevolent. I mean, they'd be a little quirky. We're scientists, after all, but not narcissists at the same time. It is true that for a long time, less so now, laboratories were sort of like little fiefdoms. There was very little oversight from the universities. And so the lab you joined became your entire world and landscape. And there was some exploitation by narcissistic lab heads for sure. As you said, it was unbounded, right? Like there was no oversight. Whereas this would be much harder to recreate today if someone wanted to. Paul Conti: And I think that's why by almost everyone listening to this, it will resonate with them. They'll find some familiarity, because you see this, or you can see this in situations where there's a bounded group of people. There's just a certain group of people in a certain situation, and that's who they are. But the authority of the person leading the group is unbounded. So there's a situation where if that person has narcissistic tendencies, aggressive drive is too high, pleasure drive is high, but not being met. If all of those things are happening, that's when you see this come to light. Which is why the destruction varies based upon the destruction that's permissible within the framework. So here that this person wasn't going to fire everyone in their lab. So in a sense, they could only damage their lab so much. Although maybe if you damage your lab so much, you don't get funding, you inadvertently sink yourself. So even there, that person could bring about their own destruction. But when you see the other end, where it's truly unbounded in the sense of war, someone who can control a machine of war, who then has everything, what do they need? Well, they need something they don't have and never will get. So now they start enacting war, and war is destructive, right? And you think, oh, that person wants something. How many times does someone start a war? There's clearly an unjustified war, right? It's a war because they want something, then they get something and they're satisfied. That's not how it goes, right? Then they get something and they're not satisfied, and they want more. So in discussions at times about narcissism and envy and how that can play out on the world stage. So sometimes huge events in human history will come up and people, for example, will bring up Adolf Hitler and the idea that Hitler wanted things. Wanted things. No, the unbound narcissism, the unbound envy wanted destruction. This is a person who, if things had continued to go as this person intended, there would have been no one left on earth but him, because the process is nothing but destructive, which is why, after the fact, there's incalculable human carnage, right? And he himself was among the incalculable human carnage, because that's the endpoint of narcissism. Of narcissism on a broad stage. That's the endpoint of envy at its highest magnitude. And we see that as examples. Whether we see on the smaller stage of the lab head that you're describing or on the larger stage of unbounded war, we end up with destruction, like 100% time. That's the final common pathway for all of that. Andrew Huberman: Are there some consistent themes of childhood that lead somebody to become a narcissist? And in addition to that, I'm curious whether or not narcissists ever have insight, whether or not, if offered the opportunity to explore the ten cupboards under the structure of self and function of self, whether or not they eventually see inside those cupboards and go, oh, my goodness, I've got this self that's clearly overinflated, and I've got these defence mechanisms, and I'm so envious and modify their behavior, or whether or not the narcissists are immune from constructive self reflection. Paul Conti: To answer the first part is the vast majority of narcissism. It may be all of it, we don't know for sure, is rooted in the childhood trauma of not feeling good enough, which is not an excuse for people doing awful things. That's not what we're saying. We're trying to have an explanatory mechanism, right? Which goes back to formative life experiences and not feeling good enough, whether it was because that person was directly denigrated, or that person wasn't denigrated, but could never work hard enough, never could be enough to get approval right again, it's not 100%, and human beings are complicated, but if you go and look, you see that, that there was never a state of like, oh, I feel good enough about myself. And if there's never a state of, I feel good enough about myself because someone has told me that and given me the pat on the head or given me the positive comment, you can see how in a certain sort of natural lay of the land, genetically and in concert with other experiences, that person can get to adulthood with a lot of aggression in them. And never having experienced I'm good enough, it's still running along inside of them. And then they're enacting that aggression in the world around them. That's most commonly what we see. And because there's such deep vulnerability and such deep insecurity, then people say, people who suffer from full blown narcissism, narcissistic personality disorder, so inaction of envy on the highest levels, that is, they're so defended, they're so strongly defended in an unhealthy manner from seeing their own vulnerability that it is extremely difficult to get that person to come around and say, okay, let's look in those ten cupboards within the field. People often talk about treating narcissistic people. They talk about it in a nihilistic way. And some, you'll see, very experienced people say, oh, that's impossible, right? That never gets better. Now, I'm not a believer in therapeutic nihilism. I think that, yes, it is the norm that that person just can't get it together to go look at that thing. They're so defended against it, they're so afraid of it. They won't look anywhere near it. So they're looking in the other direction and they're furthering all that unhealth. It's not the case that it's always that way. And on a couple of occasions I have worked with, seen, witnessed narcissistic people who can make changes. Now, it's usually in the context of something very extreme that causes them to do that. So someone who will no longer have access to family members they want to see or to financial resources that they need to keep themselves afloat, it's things that often are that dramatic. It's not always that. But we can see, though, in those kind of extenuating situations where the problem is so big, the envy is so high. But the motivation for change is very, very high, because since on the carrot and stick model, the stick here is very, very strong, that if a person then goes and does that, you can see change inside of them. So we're never in a place of therapeutic nihilism, but the barriers to that are very, very high because the self is so wounded that the person is protecting that self so strongly. That's why the narcissism and envy are so full blown. And it's hard to get that person to go back and look. But not impossible. Andrew Huberman: Based on what you're telling me, it seems that it's a very low probability that a non clinician could change a narcissist. In other words, if one is engaging in the world with a narcissist because they have to, presumably, or they just find themselves in that place, would you say to that person, there's very little, if anything, that you can do to change the narcissist's behavior or psychological framework? Because, of course, if the narcissist can't often do it for themselves with the help of a skilled clinician, why would anyone else be able to achieve that? Paul Conti: We're coming at what we're doing here from a perspective of truth about human beings, right? And that truth brings with it hopefulness. It brings with it hopefulness that people can change and how people can change. And I am 100% all for that. It's the way to look at ourselves. But it is also true that there are aspects of pathology that require clinical treatment in order to improve. S o now we're looking from the other side and saying, hey, there's a problem here and there's a deep problem here, and that we have to come at from a different perspective of how can you help that problem? And there's a science behind this, too, of what level of clinical care, for example, is most likely to be helpful to someone like this? And it's not an individual clinician even. It's a team of people who work through different modalities who can sort of wrap around that person. So it's not just a level of clinical care is needed, but it's a relatively high level of clinical care. And that, in general, is the only way that we get at narcissism. That's not 100%, but that's the vast majority of time. So what can then, the person do? Andrew Huberman: Right. Paul Conti: A person cannot be a team of clinicians, right. What that person can do, one choice is to disengage. But disengagement can come with the promise of reengagement. Many, many times I've worked with people and practiced and rehearsed with them, like, okay, what might you say to someone along the lines of, I've known you for a long time, or, I care about you, or, I love you, whatever they may say to lead in, but I can't be with you, or I can't be around you. There's something going on that makes it not okay for me. It doesn't feel okay in person. Maybe says things like, you're aggressive or demeaning or whatever it is. Or maybe they just say, it just doesn't feel okay, I can't have it. And then the need to step away from the person. But, look, if you got some help, right, if you took better care of yourself in ways that would be better for you and for the people around you, then of course I'd want to be in your life. Something like that. So disengagement can come with that encouragement, right, to the person. But one way or another, you have to set boundaries, which is okay, I have to deal with this person, so I'll deal with them a little bit, or I don't have to deal with this person, so I won't. Or I can't get away from this person, so I have to take with a grain of salt what they're saying to me. But ultimately, some form of strong boundaries or disengagement is like, that's the response. That's the self care response. For the person who's with the narcissist. Andrew Huberman: What are some other ways that the aggressive drive and pleasure drive and generative drive, for that matter, play out? For instance, we talked about the former patient of yours who eventually switched jobs, clearly had a generative drive within him, but it was being blocked by a number of choices rooted in narratives that originated in childhood, et cetera. We talked about individuals with high aggressive drive, high degree of pleasure drive, but a very diminished capacity to experience pleasure and therefore a lot of envy and the destruction that comes with envy. Paul Conti: Yes. Andrew Huberman: What are some of the other variations on these drives as you observe them in your clinical practice? Paul Conti: Well, our overall framing is we want the generative drive to be the one that's deterministic . It's the one with the strongest influence. So we want to nurture the generative drive in us and in others, and it makes sense for us to talk about that. But we've looked at how do things get out of balance. And from the perspective of, well, what if the aggressive drive or the pleasure drive. What if they're too high? Right? And then it makes sense that often, not always, what can be driving them to be so high are things that aren't healthy in us. Then the higher they get, the harder it is to gratify them. So we end up with that problem of envy. But we can be out of balance in the other direction too, where the person does not experience an ability to engage with the world around them. They don't think they can do anything to change anything for the better, inside or outside of themselves. And they're not doing much. They don't feel that they can do much and also not receiving pleasure from things. There's no gratification from the things a person is doing. Like, we see situations like this too, with the aggressive drive, the pleasure drive, or both. And then we end up not at envy, because envy is the side of excess, but we end up at demoralization on the lower side. Now, demoralization is not a specific psychiatric diagnosis. It can predispose to psychiatric problems like the biochemical abnormality of depression. But what we're talking about here is not a psychiatric diagnosis, right? Like envy is not a psychiatric diagnosis. It's a thing that can be experienced, that can lead to diagnoses. The same thing with demoralization. If you don't feel that you can make a difference to anything and you're not enjoying anything or feeling gratification from anything, then that pool is going to win out. That's going to be a demoralized person. The same way, of course, we know in experiments, when you have a rat going for food, if you do it enough, when the rat goes for the food and you take the food away, the rat stops trying. Andrew Huberman: And they learned helplessness, right? Paul Conti: That exists in us too. And it comes along with all sorts of other things. Because being not rats, we have a whole bunch of thoughts about that, of, oh my God, I'm not good enough and nothing will ever be. Okay. So demoralization then can be very strong in taking a person away from the other things we're trying to seek, either because that person has essentially the learned helplessness and all the things, the complicated things inside of us that can come along with that, or the person isn't gaining pleasure from anything. So when we're considering the ways in which we can be out of balance, we think, okay, aggression and pleasure drive, if one or the other or both is too high, we end up at envy. And if one or the other or both are too low, we end up with demoralization. And you can take almost any scenario. It could be a scenario of something that's just not really not going well for a person. It's not a clinical scenario, it's a thing in a person's life. Or we can take clinical scenarios and the vast majority outside of outliers, like a head injury, for example, we can take those scenarios and we can look at it in that way, and we can understand what's going on. At least we can understand enough that when we go back and look in the ten cupboards of the two pillars, we can then have some understanding of, okay, what is going on. We know the basic picture and how things are not in the balance we want them in now, we can understand that enough to go back and then look in those ten cupboards. And I believe that just about everything except those biological outliers, like a head injury, fits into that heuristic, which is why we can use it to understand, we can use it to help. We can use it to make change. Andrew Huberman: What a powerful lens to think about and explore the self and where things are working for us and where things are possibly not working for us. If I or anyone else out there wanted to get some read on, assess their level of aggressive drive and their level of pleasure drive and their ability to experience pleasure, what sorts of questions would one ask? For instance, is it a question of how driven am I? How much get up and go do I have? How much pleasure do I experience from an interaction with a puppy, an interaction with food? Is it too much? Does it draw me off course? Are those the sorts of very simple, but perhaps also very informative questions that we could start to use to probe our psyche? Paul Conti: Yeah, I think yes, but I would come top down. So if the goal of health is that aggression and pleasure, those drives are subserving the generative drive, then start to look there. If a person can take an honest inventory of self, like, what kind of force am I being in the world around me? And that could mean, for example, what kind of force am I being in my family? Am I denigrating to the people around me? Are the other people in the home afraid of me? What kind of force am I being a force for good? Am I bolstering? People can't always see that in themselves and take stock of themselves. But what we're talking about is situation where we think a person can like they can bring to bear. Who am I being in the world in other ways? Think of the example of the person who needed to leave the job. Who could look at that and say, no, I'm not being generative in the world in the way I want to. I'm certainly not doing my job as well as I would want to. I'm making my own life worse. So that person could then see that's out of balance or in another way, a person might see a lot of what I'm doing is sort of self serving or maybe destructive. People can realize that, right? So you can realize by taking an inventory of self, is the generative drive what's deterministic in me? And again, not always, but we're talking about a process of exploration. If the answer to that is yes, if you say, I'm trying to be the best person that I can, and I think about the people over whom I have any authority. And I try to be reasonable, and I try to be fair, and I try and be circumspect, and I try and think in someone else's shoes. Sometimes I have to set boundaries or expectations or even punishment, right? But I'm careful about how I'm doing that. And I'm certainly not perfect, and I get things wrong at times, but I do think I'm contributing to the world. I'm doing whatever I take on as well as I can do it. I'm productive at work. My kids are doing okay or my friends are doing all right. Whatever it is that if we can come up with that, then we can say, okay, exhale a little bit, like you're in a good place, right. It doesn't mean everything is optimal, of course. So then go look at the level of the aggressive drive, which might mean how assertive am I? Right? Am I the kind of person who comes up to the precipice but doesn't make the decision? Am I the kind of person who's a little too assertive? And sometimes I'm sort of walking on people a little bit. Like a person can go look at the aggressive drive within them or pleasure seeking. Am I doing things that bring me gratification? Am I engaging with the people around me in a way that brings the gratification that one might wish for, right? So if it's in a romantic relationship, is there romance? Like, are we being nice to one another? So you can go and look at that and say, am I getting gratification from the things I'm doing? Am I taking wherever this drive is within me and trying to satisfy it in reasonable, healthy ways that are also good for others? And we're back to the generative drive. So that's one way of coming at it, and it's the way that we would like to, because now what are we trying to do next? And what can we make things better? Can we optimize things? Okay, things are okay, but can we make them better? But let's say we see that the generative drive is not winning the day, right? And people can see that. Look, I'm seeking pleasure, right? It's why I got, for example, I hear over and over, that's why I got addicted to this substance. It now is not providing any pleasure to me and is now making me miserable. But I wanted what it was giving me. Again, this doesn't mean that the person just wants to have the world's best time. Right? It may mean that they're really suffering a lot. And the pleasure that that drug gave them was some relief from pain. This is how many, many people tragically ended up becoming addicted to and dying from opiates, right? Because, say, the opiate after the surgery or the opiate after the injury, then is soothing something. And it's soothing something because that person feels less bad about something inside of them. You hear this all the time. That. That then fosters addiction. So that person looking for pleasure, this isn't something where we would say in some light hearted manner, that person took chances with their life. I mean, sometimes we'll see that. But more and more, what people are looking for then is relief from suffering, right? But we can get to that point where we can ascertain, for whatever reason, that the pleasure seeking is too much. And if pleasure seeking and aggression are too much, we become aware of dissatisfaction. If you're relying too much on aggression, I always want my way. It's not always going to happen. Or I always want that pleasurable thing. I always want to feel better. That also doesn't happen. Right? So then that can guide us towards being aware of where are those drives? And if the drives are high, how much dissonance is created by what's actually coming of the drive versus the level the drive is at. I guess it's a long way of saying yes to your question, but I would sort of come top down because the generative drive is so important and it does gate forward. Like, kind of, where are we at in the spectrum of how healthy am I? Or are there elements of unhealth I want to kind of go after, or am I seeing things in myself that really say things that are unhealthy are really dominating my life are deterministic, like addiction. Just one example. Addiction. Things that are self destructive. Because then that's a place to then look at it more through the clinical lens. And maybe I won't just talk to a trusted other and go get a book, but maybe I should have clinical care. Andrew Huberman: Yeah the example of addiction is very potent, and it also brings to mind the perhaps less apparently dangerous situation, but one that I think is really common, where people have a certain amount of aggressive drive, they have a certain amount of pleasure drive, but there's a kind of passivity and draining out of the generative drive or competing out of the generative drive because of social media. And the reason I bring this up is, again, not because I dislike social media. I rely on and use social media for teaching and learning extensively. Really. But in going back to the pillars that underlie whether or not we achieve and experience agency, gratitude, peace, contentment, and delight within the pillar of function of self. There's this thing, salience, and what we're paying attention to, internal and external. And social media does seem to me a unique circumstance, never before observed in human evolution, where you have a near infinite number of environments available to you. And we know that a picture is worth 1000 words and a movie is worth a billion pictures. When it comes to drawing our attention. I mean, you give a young child, even an infant, an iPad, I mean, that kid is in the tunnel. I don't necessarily think that's a bad thing. And computers and computer screens are going to be a part of their lives now and forever, presumably. But it is the case that there are a lot of people who perhaps have the propensity for a strong generative drive, but because they also have a propensity for a pleasure drive, they wake up, they pick up the phone, they look at the phone, something captivates their attention, then they're thinking about that. It might be something that brings them delight, but more often than not, it's something that brings them either mild irritation or mild entertainment, maybe even intense entertainment for a short while. But very quickly, minutes and hours go by in which we are not engaging in the world unless we are posting valuable content. And so social media is a bit of a drain on these drives. I mean, it taps into these drives in very strong ways. And all one has to do is observe the behavior of people in public spaces, now, in airports, on trains, even in their cars. And people are essentially watching TV all day long. And it does concern me, and I raise it because I feel like it can distract from our generative drive in a way that doesn't necessarily speak to any kind of, like, deep character flaw or any kind of subconscious narrative, but just that. That salience cupboard, clearly something within that salience cupboard is happening that's unprecedented and very, very powerful and potentially quite destructive. Paul Conti: Yeah. I think to understand this, I would cite this belief. I believe this to be true, that human beings have a long history of underappreciating the power of the discoveries that are then in their own hands. So we discover gunpowder. How long until we're shooting each other? We discover nuclear fission. Now, are we going to destroy the planet? So social media, in a sense, it's a discovery. It's a thing that comes from what we've figured out as humans that now is there in front of us, and big, powerful discoveries deserve to be treated with respect. Gunpowder is very powerful, and if people need to hunt in order to survive, gunpowder can help them hunt without getting hurt, and we'd be more successful. Nuclear fission has provided some good things to humanity, but it can also destroy humanity. So I think the same is true here, that what you're talking about is something of immense power, and you can see how, if it gets out of balance. So let's use the salient. So let's say the social media is too salient. That's going to make a problem. If it's too salient in the sense that the person is always looking at things that don't make them feel good enough. Well, that's not going to go well, and that's going to affect what's in those other ten cupboards. And what is built on top of it. So then it gets into the unconscious mind, like, oh, I thought I was good enough until now. I'm looking at all this social media, and I realize I'm not. I mean, this is. People who treat teens often talk about this, that you see something that you didn't often see before, where a person who might have gotten through a lot of formative years thinking like, oh, how I look is okay, for example, then is bombarding themselves with social media that tells them how they look is not okay, and then that changes. Andrew Huberman: Absolutely. Or perhaps social media is just simply absorbing a ton of time and energy, but mostly time that could be devoted to a generative force. Paul Conti: Right. That's the other side of it. So think about the example of the person who, I know it wasn't social media, but we were saying, well, what if it were social media? That instead of 90 minutes a day, it's 8 hours because there's an analog there and we see a lot of this, then it's taking something that can be good in sense, you could say even should be good. There's enough out there in terms of learning and bolstering that why should it not be good. But it's not good because the defenses then shift. Like if you're relying on it 10 hours a day, there has to be some denial, right? Because there are other things to do in the world. There has to be some avoidance. There has to be some rationalization, like something is going on there that's not healthy. So if you tell me this person is utilizing social media 10 hours a day, they're not looking at things that make them feel bad about themselves, they're just doing it. Then I think, okay, something is out of balance. Now it may be that that person's defenses are out of balance. So think about the example of the person with the job they didn't like. Then their defensive structure changes. Then the thing that was good for them, they rely on too much. And now it becomes something that's not good for them, right? So then you go and look at what else is out of balance here. What else is driving this now? Maybe it's being driven by the change in defense mechanisms, et cetera. Maybe it's the other way around that this person just kind of habituated to doing more and more and more and more of it. And then you would come at it in a different way of, okay, can you slowly but surely do less, replace the time with things that were good before? Because you could then back that person out to where they were before, but you're not going to back the person out to where they were before if it's being driven by something else. So we again come to the curiosity. You tell me that person is on social media 14 hours a day. I'm curious. I want to understand what is the balance of those drives. You've just told me a very powerful point about salience that doesn't sound like a good one. So already you're giving me clues about where the drives are, which means, where's that person at? What's going on in all those cabinets? Then you give more information. Now sit and talk with the person. Now you're going to understand what is the lay of the land here and how do we go about making it better. Andrew Huberman: I love the concept of the generative drive. First of all, because it's pro social. It brings about great things for us and for the world. And what is better than peace, contentment and delight. Especially when we remind ourselves that those are active phrases or those can be achieved and experienced inside of action. It's not just sitting, levitating, navel gazing, that sort of thing. So it's not enlightenment, right. It's peace, contentment and delight. Paul Conti: Very big difference. Andrew Huberman: Very big difference. Yes. One of the other reasons I love this concept of the generative drive so much is also because it is a verb state. It has to do with creating things in us and in the world, in cultivating our experience of things and what we do and what we say and how we respond to what others do and say. And I also like it because it's distinct from the way that we're normally taught to think about psychological well being or being a healthy individual, which usually centers around a discussion of goals and values and what am I trying to focus on, and what sorts of people do I want to engage with in the world? And certainly all of that is really important goals and who you engage with. But I think for many people out there, much of their time is spent thinking about other people, like how healthier or unhealthy are the people they're dating or their friends, or what's going on between two family members, which, of course, is fine to think about. But a lot of emphasis is placed on our assessments of others and how those are impacting us. And in some cases, people default to just thinking about others and their problems and seeing their problems. And what we're really talking about here is a process of introspection and inquiry that's very structured. And as it's been laid out by you, these two pillars, structure of self, function of self. With these ten cupboards, that might sound like a lot of cupboards, but as we talked about in the first episode, all of that flows up to these very simple ideals and concepts and action, states and ways of being. And to me, there's nothing more powerful than the statement that what we are all seeking are states of agency and gratitude. Because, again, to go back to the analogy of physical fitness, there are not an infinite number of different physical states or states of fitness that one can seek. There's endurance, there's strength, there's flexibility, there's dynamic movement, there's explosiveness, there's speed. There are a bunch of subtleties to it. But here it really seems that the psyche, ourselves and our mental health is really tractable if we turn the lens and we look inward. Paul Conti: Yes, I think that hits upon a very, very important point as we talk about understanding oneself and the process of change. And I would describe that as rational aspiration. So let's use the physical health example. If I think, okay, I want to be healthier, I want to have more strength, I want to have more endurance, and I might even have ideas of what that would be. I want to be able to run a certain distance in a certain time, lift a certain amount of weight, I have an idea of what that is it. But rational aspiration is rooted in our present. I'm aware that there's a me now that isn't in that state. And I'm aware that there are things that I'm going to do to get to that state and I'm not that dreading them, like, okay, they'll be difficult, right? But that's okay, I can do difficult things, I can take pride in doing difficult things. And that's how we all achieve things. So I see myself in the present because of course goals are good, and that's true as long as we're still living our lives in the present because otherwise goals just become fantasies or things we want to possess. So if I'm aware of the state of physical health I'm in right now, and I'm aware of the state of physical health I want to be in, and I know there's a bunch of pathways I could take to get there, but I have to think about it, figure it out, do those things, and then I'm going to navigate myself there. That's how the whole process is good. I don't feel bad about myself now. I recognize something I would like to change. I'm not saying, oh, you're a loser, because you don't have those things, right? I feel good about myself now. I recognize there's something I want and there's going to be a process, a process across time, across effort that's going to navigate me there. Then when I get there, I feel good about being there. It's very, very different if I think I want that. I want to possess in a sense. I want to possess the ability to run a certain distance in a certain time. I just want the thing. I'm covetous of the thing. That is not good, right? Because a person then often is denigrating to the self. Not always, but that's a motivation to go out and get that thing that's better. And they're really lamenting the process of getting. They just want something as an endpoint. And that doesn't make for happiness, it doesn't make for even the humility and humility in action, the gratitude, the humility is, I can't just do that overnight. I'm going to have to work hard. People have to work hard. I'm no different than anybody else. I'm not special. I got to get in there and work and use the elbow grease, and then I'll get healthier. Like all of that is good. That I just want to possess something is not good. And that's why people in scenarios like this, they might go through maybe in an unthinking way or they're gutting it out or wherever they go, and they get that thing, right, but then that t hing is not enough and they want more. Now, there's nothing wrong with wanting more if it's the healthy inaction of self. I'm going to now map my way. This feels better. I want to map myself from here to the next level of better physical fitness. That's different than I just want that thing. Because then if I get it, it won't be good enough. It doesn't make me happy. It doesn't satisfy me. And that's the unhealthy state of just wanting things to possess them. And then we don't feel good about them, which is the thought of if you give people. If you give a person something, they'll resent you for it. Again, we're painting it in a sort of certain way, the context of that statement, which I used to hear a lot, even when I was younger, people would say that, right. And what were they trying to get at? What they were getting at is it doesn't feel good if you didn't work for something, right? Like if you didn't work very hard and you got a C, but I give you an A or somebody gives me an A. I know that that's not good. I know that I got the thing. I got the A. And I might feel happy in the moment because I wanted that thing, but there's no real pleasure in it. There's no satisfaction, there's no contentment, there's no sense of self, there's nothing generative. I didn't work hard enough to go from a C to an A. And that really brings us back to the self that we're growing on top of the structure. Right. And how that self is functioning. How it's striving. Because now we're really talking about strivings. And if I'm going to strive for something and work hard to get it, will I get the good feeling on the other side of it. And now we're living in the generative space. Andrew Huberman: Well, I love the structure of what you've laid out. Again... Paul Conti: Thank you. Andrew Huberman: The pillars of structure of self and function of self, with ten cupboards between the two of them that, when explored, can seem a little bit complex. But they're really some very straightforward types of inquiry that anyone can go about, about self awareness and address potential defense mechanisms. What we're conscious of, maybe what we're not conscious of. Look at our behaviors and our strivings and how that flows up to these simple ideals again, of empowerment, humility, agency and gratitude as verbs. And then from that, peace, contentment and delight. And the generative drive, which, gosh, if there ever was a more powerful concept and something to strive for, I don't think it exists, because the generative drive is extraordinary in the number of different ways it plays out, and it seems always positively right. And of course, the aggressive drive, the pleasure drive, exists to varying extents in all of us, but cannot be allowed to overcome the generative drive if we're going to really thrive. So thank you again so much for this framework. And again, to remind people listening and watching that this framework is mapped out in a downloadable PDF. If people want to see it visually, even though we've touched on it several times before, I really appreciate how logical, clear and actionable this framework is, and also that in providing a framework for us, it gives us something to hold our mind to. I think I, and so many people out there are familiar with being in a struggle and not being able to orient. Where am I in the struggle? Not knowing what to do? And you've provided some incredible points of reference for us to really focus on. Start asking questions about I and how I see myself, what am I paying attention to, and so on and so forth, to really first anchor and orient, and then be able to move forward in this process as many times as is required to get where we each and all want to go. So thank you so much for this. I know in our next discussion we're going to touch on the relational aspects of human existence, not just selves, but interactions between selves, including some of the, let's call it, darker and unfortunate aspects of human existence, like narcissists, and some of the challenges of different full blown personality disorders. But also just in terms of building healthy relationships between friends, romantic partners, parents and children and siblings and coworkers and all the rest. So thank you again for this incredibly rich knowledge that you provided us, and a map forward. Paul Conti: You're very welcome and thank you. I appreciate the opportunity to talk about it with you. Andrew Huberman: Great. Well, to be continued. Thank you for joining me for today's discussion about how to improve your mental health with Dr. Paul Conti. If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific, zero cost way to support us. In addition, please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and Apple. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five star review. Please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode. That's the best way to support this podcast. If you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests that you'd like me to consider hosting on the Huberman Lab podcast, please put those in the comments section on YouTube. I do read all the comments. And If you're not already following me on social media, I am Hubermanlab on all platforms. So that's Instagram, Twitter, LinkedIn Threads, and Facebook. And on all those platforms I discuss science and science related tools, some of which overlap with the content of the Huberman Lab podcast, but much of which is distinct from the content of the Huberman Lab podcast. So again, it's Hubermanlab on all social media channels. Not on today's episode, but on many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, we discuss supplements. While supplements aren't necessary for everybody, many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like enhancing sleep, for hormone support, and for focus. If you'd like to see the supplements discussed on the Huberman Lab podcast, you can go to livemomentous, spelled O-U-S. So it's livemomentous.com/huberman. If you haven't already subscribed to our newsletter, it is a zero cost newsletter called the Neural network newsletter. And in the Neural network newsletter you get free podcast summaries as well as toolkits. The toolkits are brief PDFs that list off the specific science backed protocols for things like improving your sleep, improving focus, optimizing dopamine, deliberate cold exposure. We have a complete summary of our fitness series. Again, all available, completely zero cost. You simply go to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu, scroll down to newsletter, and provide your email to sign up. We do not share your email with anybody. Thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion with Dr. Paul Conti. And last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [Closing theme music]

========================================

--- Video 185 ---
Video ID: z8c6EyMNd0A
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z8c6EyMNd0A
Title: Journal Club with Dr. Peter Attia | Metformin for Longevity & The Power of Belief Effects
Published: 2023-09-11 12:04:21 UTC
Description:
In this journal club episode, my guest is Stanford and Johns Hopkins-trained physician, Dr. Peter Attia, M.D., who is also the host of The Drive podcast and the author of the bestselling book "Outlive: The Science & Art of Longevity."

We each present a scientific paper and discuss the findings' strengths, weaknesses and actionable takeaways.

First, we discuss an article that addresses whether taking the drug metformin can enhance longevity. Then, we discuss an article on belief effects (similar to placebo effects), showing how the effects of a drug on the brain and cognition depend on one's belief about the dose of the drug taken, not the actual dose.

Our conversation also highlights how to read, interpret and critique scientific studies. This episode ought to be of interest to those curious about health and longevity, medicine and psychology and for anyone seeking to better understand how to read and digest scientific findings.

#HubermanLab #Science 

Thank you to our sponsors
AG1: https://drinkag1.com/huberman
Helix Sleep: https://helixsleep.com/huberman 
Levels: https://levels.link/huberman 
InsideTracker: https://insidetracker.com/huberman 
Momentous: https://livemomentous.com/huberman

Huberman Lab Social & Website
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/hubermanlab 
Threads: https://www.threads.net/@hubermanlab
Twitter: https://twitter.com/hubermanlab 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/hubermanlab 
TikTok: https://www.tiktok.com/@hubermanlab 
LinkedIn: https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrew-huberman
Website: https://hubermanlab.com 
Newsletter: https://hubermanlab.com/neural-network

Dr. Peter Attia
Website: https://peterattiamd.com 
Outlive: The Science & Art of Longevity: https://peterattiamd.com/outlive
The Peter Attia Drive Podcast: https://peterattiamd.com/podcast
Newsletter: https://peterattiamd.com/newsletter 
X (formerly Twitter): https://twitter.com/PeterAttiaMD 
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/peterattiamd 
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/c/PeterAttiaMD 
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/peterattiamd 

Articles
Reassessing the evidence of a survival advantage in Type 2 diabetes treated with metformin compared with controls without diabetes: a retrospective cohort study: https://bit.ly/3EypTAJ
The Hallmarks of Aging: https://bit.ly/3ZeqnFI
Can people with type 2 diabetes live longer than those without? A comparison of mortality in people initiated with metformin or sulphonylurea monotherapy and matched, non-diabetic controls: https://bit.ly/3Lespjp
A thalamic circuit represents dose-like responses induced by nicotine-related beliefs in human smokers: https://bit.ly/3LiAaEX

Other Resources
TAME (Targeting Aging with Metformin) Trial: https://bit.ly/3P7eMDI
Interventions Testing Program (ITP): https://bit.ly/3EDtmOg
Slow-Carb Diet (Tim Ferris): https://bit.ly/462q6YD
Dr. Alia Crum: Science of Mindsets for Health & Performance (Huberman Lab episode): https://bit.ly/3PdbKhd 
Nicotine’s Effects on the Brain & Body & How to Quit Smoking or Vaping (Huberman Lab episode): https://bit.ly/3PkGopc
Adderall, Stimulants & Modafinil for ADHD: Short- & Long-Term Effects (Huberman Lab episode): https://bit.ly/3Pg7jT3
Neural correlates of interspecies perspective taking in the post-mortem Atlantic Salmon: an argument for multiple comparisons correction (Dead salmon study): https://bit.ly/3PvJvf9

Timestamps
00:00:00 Dr. Peter Attia, Journal Club
00:03:27 Sponsors: Helix Sleep & Levels 
00:06:11 Dreams
00:12:36 Article #1, Metformin, Mitochondria, Blood Glucose
00:19:47 Type 2 Diabetes & Causes, Insulin Resistance
00:25:30 Type 2 Diabetes Medications, Metformin, Geroprotection, Bannister Study
00:36:19 Sponsor: AG1
00:37:15 TAME Trial; Demographics, Twin Cohort
00:44:27 Metformin & Mortality Rate
00:51:28 Kaplan-Meier Mortality Curve, Error Bars & Significance, Statistical Power
01:01:17 Sponsor: InsideTracker
01:02:23 Hazard Ratios, Censoring
01:09:00 Metformin Advantage?, Variables, Interventions Testing Program
01:16:02 Berberine, Acarbose, SGLT2 Inhibitors
01:23:48 Blood Glucose & Energy Balance; Caloric Restriction, Aging Biomarkers
01:32:22 Tool: Reading Journal Articles, 4 Questions, Supplemental Information
01:38:10 Article #2, Belief Effects vs. Placebo Effect 
01:45:22 Nicotine Effects
01:51:07 Nicotine Doses & Belief Effects, fMRI Scan
02:00:07 Biological Effects, Dose-Dependent Response & Belief Effects
02:05:14 Biology & Beliefs, Significance, Dopamine Response, Non-Smokers
02:10:57 Dose-Dependence & Beliefs, Side Effects, Nocebo Effect
02:19:06 Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Sponsors, Momentous, Neural Network Newsletter, Social Media 

Title Card Photo Credit: Mike Blabac - https://www.blabacphoto.com

Disclaimer: https://hubermanlab.com/disclaimer

Transcript Language: English (auto-generated)
welcome to the huberman Lab podcast where we discuss science and science-based tools for everyday life I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor of neurobiology and Ophthalmology at Stanford school of medicine today marks the first Journal Club episode between myself and Dr Peter attia for any of you that are not familiar with Dr Peter attia he is a medical doctor in MD who is an expert in all aspects of health and lifespan he is the author of a best-selling book entitled outlive which is a phenomenal resource on all things Health span and lifespan and he is the host of the very popular podcast the drive where he interviews various experts in all domains of medicine and scientists as well today Peter and I hold our first online collaborative Journal club for those of you that aren't familiar with what a journal Club is a journal Club is a common practice in graduate school and or medical school whereby students get together to discuss one or two papers to critique those papers and to really compare their own conclusions of those papers with the conclusions of the authors and to highlight any key takeaways Peter and I have been wanting to do a journal club together are for a very long time and we decided to do that journal club and to record it for you so today you will be sitting in on the first huberman Atia Journal club by the way it could just have easily been called the Atia huberman Journal club and we will discuss two papers first Peter is going to discuss a paper on Metformin which is a drug that many people are interested in for its potential role in longevity I want to highlight potential there he's going to compare that paper to previous findings on Metformin and by the end of that discussion he will advise as to whether or not he himself would take metformin and whether or not other people might be well advised or ill-advised to take Metformin based on the data in that paper and at this time then I present a paper which is about the placebo effect I have to imagine that most of you have heard of the placebo effect but what's interesting about the paper that we discussed today is that it shows that the placebo effect can actually follow a dose response so it's not just all or none it actually is the case that you can scale the degree of placebo effect depending on whether or not you're thinking you're taking low doses moderate doses or high doses of a particular drug and the particular drug that's discussed in the paper that I cover is nicotine so for those of you that are interested in cognitive enhancement by way of pharmacology or frankly for people who are simply interested in how our beliefs can shape our physiology I think you'll find that discussion to be very interesting so by the end of today's episode You Will Not only have learned about two novel sets of findings one in the realm of longevity as it relates to metformin and another in the realm of neurobiology and placebos or Placebo effects but you will also learn how a journal Club is conducted I think you'll see in observing how we parse these papers and discuss them even arguing in them at times that what scientists and clinicians do is they take a look at the existing peer-reviewed research and they look at that peer-reviewed research with a fresh eye asking does this paper really show know what it claims to show or not and in some cases the answer is yes and in other cases the answer is no what I know is for certain is that by the end of today's episode you will learn a lot of science you'll learn a lot about health practices some of which you may want to apply or avoid and you'll learn a lot about how science and medicine is carried out before we begin I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford it is however part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost to Consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public in keeping with that theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast our first sponsor is Helix sleep Helix sleep makes customized mattresses to give you the best possible night's sleep now sleep is the foundation of mental health physical health and performance when we are sleeping well and enough mental health physical health and performance all stand to be at their best one of the key things to getting a great night's sleep is to make sure that your mattress is tailored to your unique sleep needs Helix sleep has a brief two minute quiz that if you go to their website you take that quiz and answer questions such as do you tend to sleep on your back your side or your stomach do you tend to run hot or cold in the middle of the night maybe you don't know the answers to those questions and that's fine at the end of that two-minute quiz they will match you to a mattress that's ideal for your sleep needs I sleep on the dusk at the usk mattress and when I started sleeping on a dust mattress about two years ago my sleep immediately improved so if you're interested in upgrading your mattress go to Helix sleep.com huberman take their two-minute sleep quiz and they'll match you to a customized mattress for you and you'll get up to 350 off any mattress order and two free pillows again if interested go to helixsleep.com huberman for up to 350 off and two free pillows today's episode is also brought To Us by levels levels is a program that lets you see how different foods and behaviors affect your health by giving you real-time feedback using a continuous glucose monitor one of the most important factors impacting your immediate and long-term health is the way that your body manages its blood glucose or sometimes referred to as blood sugar levels to maintain energy and focus throughout the day you want to keep your blood glucose steady without big Spa bikes or dips using levels you can monitor how different types of foods and different food combinations as well as food timing and things like exercise combined to impact your blood glucose levels I started using levels a little over a year ago and it gave me a lot of insight into how specific Foods were spiking my blood sugar and then leaving me feeling tired for several hours afterwards as well as how the spacing of exercise and my meals was impacting my overall energy and in doing so it really allowed me to optimize how I eat what I eat when I exercise and so on such that my blood glucose levels and energy levels are stable throughout the day if you're interested in learning more about levels and trying a continuous glucose monitor yourself go to levels.link huberman right now levels is offering an additional two free months of membership again that's levels.link l-i-n-k slash huberman to get two free months of membership and now for my journal Club discussion with Dr Peter attia Peter so good to have you here so great to be here my friend this is something that you and I have been wanting to do for a while and it's basically something that we do all the time which is to peruse the literature and find papers that we are excited about for whatever reason and oftentimes that will lead to a text dialogue or a phone call or both but this time we've opted to try talking about these papers that we find particularly exciting in real time for the first time as this podcast format first of all so that people can get some sense of why we're so excited about these papers we we do feel that people should know about these findings and second of all that it's an opportunity for people to learn how to dissect information and think about the papers they hear about in the news the papers they might download from PubMed if they're inclined but also just to start thinking like scientists and clinicians and get a better sense of what it looks like to pick through a paper The Good The Bad and The Ugly so we're flying a little blind here which is fun um I'm definitely excited for all the above reasons yeah no this is uh you and I have been talking about this for some time and and um you know actually we used to run a journal club inside the practice where once a month one person would um just pick a paper and you'd go through it in kind of a formal Journal Club presentation we've gotten away from it for the last year just because we've been a little stretched then I think it's something we need to resume because it's uh it's a great way to learn and it's a skill you know people probably ask you all the time because I know I get asked all the time hey what are the do's and don'ts of interpreting you know scientific papers is it enough to just read the abstract um and you know usually the answer is well no um but the how-to is is tougher and I think the two papers we've chosen today illustrate two opposite ends of the spectrum you know you're gonna obviously talk about something that we're going to probably get into the technical nature of the assays the limitations Etc and the paper ultimately I've chosen to present although I apologize I'm surprising you with this up until you know a few minutes ago is is actually a very straightforward simple epidemiologic paper that I think has important significance I had originally gone down the rabbit hole on a much more nuanced paper about ATP binding cassettes in cholesterol absorption But ultimately I thought this one might be more interesting to a broader audience by the way I got to tell you a funny story so I had a dream last night about you and um in this dream you were obsessed with making this certain drink that was like your Elixir and it had all of these crazy ingredients in it some tons of supplements in it but the one thing I remembered when I woke up because I forgot most of them I was really trying so hard to remember them one thing that you had in it was do like you had to collect a certain amount of dew off the leaves every morning to put into this drink it was so but it was like just sounds like something that I would do and and so but here's the best part you had you had like a thermos of this stuff that had to be with you everywhere and all of your clothing had to be tailored with a special pocket that you could put the thermos into so that you were never without the special Andrew drink and again you know how dreams when you're having them seem so logical and real and then you wake up and you're like doesn't even make sense like why would he want the thermos in his shirt like that I would warm it up like you know all these but but boy it was a realistic dream and there were lots of things in it including Dew special do off the leaves every morning I love it well it's not that far from reality I'm a big um fan of yerba mate I'm drinking it right now in fact um in its many forms usually the loose leaf I don't tend to drink it out of the gourd my dad's Argentine so that's where I picked it up I started drinking it when I was like five years old or younger which I don't recommend people do is heavily caffeinated don't drink the smoked versions either folks I think those are potentially carcinogenic but this thing that you describe of of carrying around the thermos close to the body if you are ever in Uruguay or if you ever spot grown men in a restaurant anywhere in the world carrying a thermos with them and to their meals and hugging it close chances are they're Uruguayan and they're drinking yerba mate they drink it usually after their meals supposed to be good for your digestion so it's not that far from from reality I don't carry the thermos but I do drink mate every day and um I'm gonna start collecting dew off the leaves uh just a few drops every morning oh my um some other time we can talk about dreams recently I've been doing some dream exploration I've had some absolutely transformative dreams for the first time in my life one dream in particular that has that allowed me to feel something I've never felt before and has catalyzed a large number of important decisions in a way that no other experience waking or sleep has ever impacted me and this was drug free Etc um and do you think you could have had that dream we don't have to get into it if you don't talk about it now but was there a lot of work you had to do to prepare for that dream to have taken place oh yes yeah um at least uh 18 months of intensive um analysis type work um with a very skilled psychiatrist but I wasn't trying to seed the dream yeah yeah it was just I I was at a sticking point with a certain process in my life and then I was taking a walk while waking and realized that my brain my subconscious was going to keep working on this I just decided it's going to keep working on it and then two nights later I traveled to a meeting in Aspen and I had the most profound dream ever where I was able to sense something and feel something I've always wanted to feel as so real within the dream woke up knew it was a dream and realized this is what people close to me that I respect have been talking about but I was able to feel it and therefore I can actually access this in my Waking Life it was it was it was absolutely transformative for me um anyway sometime I can share more details with you or the audience but for now maybe we should talk about these papers very well um who should go first I'm happy to go first this one's this one's this is a pretty straightforward paper so so we're going to talk about a paper titled reassessing the evidence of a survival advantage in type 2 diabetics treated with metformin compared with controls without diabetes a retrospective cohort study this is by Matthew Thomas Keyes and colleagues this was published last fall um why is this paper important so this paper is important because in 2014 uh banister published a paper that I think in many ways kind of got the world very excited about metformin so it was almost 10 years ago and I'm sure many people have heard about this paper even if they're not familiar with it but they've heard the concept of the paper and in many ways it's the paper that has led to the excitement around the potential for zero protection with metformin and I should probably just Define for the audience what Giro protection means when we think probably also sorry to interrupt what metformin is just for the uninformed that's a great point so I'll start with the with the latter so metformin is a drug that has been used for many years uh depends you know where it was first approved I think was in Europe um but you know call it directionally 50 plus years of use as a first line agent for patients with type 2 diabetes in the U.S maybe 40 plus years so this is a drug that's been around forever trade name glucophage or brand name and uh but but again it's you know it's a generic drug today the mechanism by which metformin works is debated hotly but what I think is not debated is the immediate thing that metformin does which is it inhibits complex one of the mitochondria so again maybe just taking a step back so the mitochondria as everybody thinks of those as the cellular engine for making ATP so the most efficient way that we make ATP is through oxidative phosphorylation where we take either fatty acid pieces or a breakdown product of glucose once it's partially metabolized to pyruvate we put that into an electron transport chain and we basically trade chemical energy for electrons that can then be used to make phosphates onto ADP so it's you know you think of everything you do eating is taking the chemical energy and food taking the energy that's in those bonds making electrical energy in the mitochondria those electrons pump a gradient that allow you to make ATP to give a sense of how Primal and important this is if you block that process completely you die so everybody's probably heard of cyanide right cyanide is something that is incredibly toxic even at the smallest doses cyanide is a complete Blocker of this process and if my memory serves me correctly I think it blocks complex four of the mitochondria I don't know if you recall if it complex three are complex four I know a lot about toxins that impact the nervous system but I don't know a lot about poison but if ever you want to have some fun we can talk about all the dangerous stuff that animals make and insects make and how they kill you yeah prototoxin and all these things that blocks I I really geek out on this stuff because it allows me to talk about Neuroscience animals and scary stuff it's like combines it so we could do that sometime for fun maybe at the end if we have a few moments so so you know something like cyanide that is a very potent inhibitor of this electron transport chain will kill you instantly people understand that of course a drop of Cyanide and you would you would be dead literally instantaneously yeah so metformin works at the first of those complexes I believe there are four if my memory serves correctly four electron transport chain complexes and um but of course it's not a complete inhibition of it it's just kind of a weak Blocker of that and the net effect of that is what so the net effect of that is that it changes the ratio of adenosine monophosphate to adenosine diphosphate um what's less clear is why does that have a benefit in diabetics because what it unambiguously does is reduces the amount of glucose that the liver puts out so hepatic glucose output is one of the fundamental problems that's happening in type 2 diabetes you may recall I think we talked about this even on a previous podcast you and I sitting here with normal blood sugar have about five grams of glucose in our total circulation that's it five grams think about how quickly the brain will go through that within minutes so the only thing that keeps Us Alive is our liver's ability to titrate out glucose and if it puts out too much for example if the glucose can if the glucose level was consistently two teaspoons you would have type 2 diabetes so the difference between being metabolically healthy and having you know profound type 2 diabetes is one teaspoon of glucose in your bloodstream so the ability of the liver to Tamp down on high glucose output is important metformin seems to do that so can I just ask oh one question is it fair um to provide this overly simplified summary of the biochemistry which is that when we eat the food is broken down but the breaking of bonds creates energy that then our cells can use in the form of ATP and the mitochondria are essential of that process and that metformin is partially short-circuiting the energy production process and so even though we are eating when we have metformin in our system presumably there is going to be less net glucose the bonds are going to be broken down we're chewing we're digesting but less of that is turned into blood sugar glucose well sort of I mean it's not um it's not depriving you of ultimately storing that energy what it's doing is changing the way the body um partitions fuel that's probably a better way to think about it to be a little bit more accurate so um for example like it's not depriving you of the calories that are in that glucose that would be you know fantastic but that was the that was the uh Electra remember the Electra from the 90s Electra folks for those of you don't remember um by the way if you ever ate this stuff you'd remember because it was a fat that was not easily digested it had sort of in sort of analogous to plant fiber or something like that so it was being put into potato chips and whatnot and the idea is that people would um would simply excrete it um and I don't know what happened except that people got a lot of stomach aches and um in the world we know that the anal seepage is what really did that product only a physician because after all Peter's a clinician for physician and MD and I'm not um could find it a um an appropriate term to describe yeah when you have that much when you have that much fat malabsorption you start to have accidents wow and so that did away with that product right it was either that or the diaper industry was trying to really take off okay that's why you don't hear about Electro that's right so so we've got this drug we've got this drug metformin it's considered a perfect First Line agent for people with type 2 diabetes so again what's happening when you have type 2 diabetes uh the primary insult probably occurs in the muscles and it is insulin resistance everybody hears that term what does it mean uh insulin is a peptide it binds to a receptor on a cell so let's just talk about it through the lens of the muscle because the muscle is responsible for most glucose disposal it gets glucose out of the circulation high glucose is toxic we have to put it away and we want to put most of it into our muscles that's where we store 75 to 80 percent of it when insulin binds to the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase is triggered inside so just ignore all that but a chemical reaction takes place inside the cell that leads to a phosphorylation so ATP donates a phosphate group and a transporter just think of like a little tunnel like a little straw goes up through the level of the cell and now glucose can freely flow in so I'm sure you've talked a lot about this with your audience things that move against gradients need pumps to move them things that move with gradients don't glucose is moving with its gradient into the cell it doesn't need active transport but it does need the transporter put there that requires the energy that's the job of insulin by the way I did not know that I mean I certainly know active and passive transport as it relates to like neurotransmitter and ion flow um but I'd never heard that when insulin binds to a cell that literally a little straw is placed into the membrane glucose doesn't need a pump to move it in um because there's much more glucose outside the cell than inside so it's just but the energy required is to move the straw up to the cell so biology is so cool yeah it is so so what happens is as and Gerald Shulman at Yale did the best work on elucidating this as the intramuscular fat increases and I by intramuscular I mean intracellular fat uh triasil and disoglycerides accumulate in a muscle cell that signal gets interrupted and all of a sudden I'm making these numbers up if you used to need two units of insulin to trigger the little transporter now you need three and then you need four and then you need five you need more and more insulin to get the thing up that is the definition of insulin resistance the cell is becoming resistant to the effect of insulin and therefore the early Mark of insulin resistance the canary in the coal mine is not an increase in glucose it's an increase in insulin so normal glycemia with hyperinsulinemia especially postprandial meaning after you eat hyperinsulinemia is the thing that tells you hey you're five ten years away from this being a real problem so fast forward many steps down the line someone with type 2 diabetes has long passed that system now not only are they insulin resistant where they just need a boatload of insulin which is made by the pancreas to get glucose out of the circulation but now that system's not even working well and now they're not getting glucose into the cell so now their glucose level is elevated and even though it's continually being chewed up and used up because again the brain alone would account for most of that glucose disposal the liver is now becoming insulin resistant as well and now the liver isn't able to regulate how much glucose to put into circulation and it's overdoing it so now you have too much glucose being pumped into the circulation by the liver and you have the muscles that can't dispose of it and it's really a vicious brutal Cascade because the same problem of fat accumulating in the muscle is now starting to happen in the pancreas and now the relatively few cells in the pancreas called beta cells that make insulin are undergoing inflammation due to the fat accumulation within the pancreas itself and so now the thing that you need to make more insulin is less effective at making insulin so ultimately way way way down the line a person with type 2 diabetes might actually even require insulin exogenously could you share with us a few of the causes of type 2 diabetes of insulin resistance I mean one it sounds like is accumulating too much fat yeah so energy imbalance would be an enormous one inactivity or insufficient activity is probably the single most of important so when Gerald Shulman was running clinical trials at Yale they would be recruiting undergrads to study obviously because you're typically recruiting young people and they would you know be doing these very detailed mechanistic studies where they would require actual tissue biopsies so you know you're going to biopsy somebody's quadriceps and actually look at what's happening in the muscle well I remember him telling me this when I interviewed him on my podcast he said the most important criteria of the people we interviewed is because they were still lean these weren't people that were overweight but they had to be inactive you couldn't have active people in these studies so exercising is one of the most important things you're going to do to ward off insulin resistance but there are other things that can cause insulin resistance sleep deprivation has a profound impact on insulin resistance I think we probably talked about this previously but if you you know some very elegant mechanistic studies where you sleep deprive people you know you let them only sleep for four hours for a week you'll reduce their glucose disposal by about half which is I mean that's a staggering amount you're basically inducing profound insulin resistance in just a week of sleep deprivation hypercortisolemia is another factor and then obviously energy imbalance so where when you're when you're accumulating excess energy when you're getting fatter if you start spilling that fat outside of the subcutaneous fat cells into the muscle into the liver into the pancreas all those things are exacerbating and got it okay so enter metformin first line drug so most of the drugs so every drug you give a person with type 2 diabetes is trying to address part of this chain so some of the drugs tell you to make more insulin that's that's one of the strategies so here are drugs like sulfona ureas they tell the body make more insulin other drugs like insulin just give you more of the insulin thing metformin tackles the problem elsewhere it tamps down glucose by addressing the glucose the hepatic glucose output channel glp-1 agonists are another drug they increase insulin sensitivity initially causing you to also make more insulin um so that's ozempic yes yeah and is it true that berberine is more or less the poor man's metformin yep okay yeah it's a from a tree bark it just happens to have these same properties yeah and by the way reducing mtor and reducing blood glucose yeah and Metformin by the way occurs from a lilac plant in France like that's where it was discovered so it's also metformin is also based on a substance found in nature so you you need a prescription for metformin you don't need a prescription for berberine correct but yeah we can talk about berberine a little bit later I had a couple great experiences with berberine and a couple bad experiences interesting or green yeah so um maybe taking one step back from this in 2011 I became very interested in metformin personally just reading about it obsessing over it and just somehow decided like I should be taking this so I actually began taking metformin I still remember exactly when I started I started it in May of 2011 and I realized that because I was on a trip with a bunch of buddies we went to the Berkshire Hathaway shareholder meeting which is uh you know the Buffett uh shareholder meeting and uh you know it was kind of like a fun thing to do and I remember being so sick the whole time because I didn't titrate up the dose of Metformin I just went straight to two grams a day which is kind of like the full dose and we went to this is that characteristic of your approach to things yes I think that's safe to say next time I'll give you a thermos of this Dew that I collect in the morning [Laughter] so I remember being so sick that the whole time we were in Nebraska or Omaha I guess I couldn't we went to Dairy Queen because you do all the Buffett things when you're there right like I couldn't have an ice cream at Dairy Queen you couldn't I mean I could I'm so nauseous oh because I would say if you've got metformin in your system you're going to buffer glucose you could have four ice cream cones except I couldn't put I couldn't keep anything down I mean I was so nauseous so so clearly metformin has this side effect initially which is a little bit of appetite suppression but regardless that's the story on Metformin there are a lot of reasons I was interested in it um I wasn't thinking true zero protection that term wasn't in my vernacular at the time but what I was thinking is hey this is going to help you buffer glucose better it's got to be better and this was sort of my first foray into you know self-experimentation do you want to Define zero protection yeah yeah it's a good term geriatric Giro yeah so so yeah Jiro from from geriatric old protection so protection from aging and when we talk about a drug like metformin or rapamycin or even NAD NR these things the idea is we're talking about them as Giro protective to signal that they are drugs that are not targeting a specific disease of Aging for example a pcsk9 inhibitor is sort of zero protective but it's targeting one specific pathway which is cardiovascular disease and dyslipidemia whereas the idea is a zero protective agent would Target Hallmarks of Aging there are nine Hallmarks of Aging please don't ask me to recite them I've never been able to get all nines straight but people know what we're talking about right so decreased autophagy increased senescence decreased nutrient sensing or defective nutrient sensing uh proteomic instability genomic instability methylation all of these things epigenetic changes those are all the nine Hallmarks of eight to seven yeah yeah so a zero protective agent would Target those deep down biologic Hallmarks of Aging and in 2014 a paper came out by banister that basically got the world focused on this problem by the world I mean the world of of anti-aging so what what banister and colleagues did was they took a registry from the UK and they got a set of patients who were on Metformin with type 2 diabetes but only metformin so these were people who had just progressed to diabetes they were not put on any other drug just metformin and then they found from the same registry a group of matched controls so this is a standard way that epidemiologic studies are done because again you don't have the luxury of doing the randomization so you're trying to account for all the biases that could Exist by saying we're going to take people who look just like that person with diabetes so can we match them for age sex socioeconomic status blood pressure BMI everything we can and then let's look at what happened to them over time now again this is all happening in the future so you're looking into the past it's retrospect in that sense and so let me just kind of pull up the the sort of table here so I can kind of walk through and this is not in the paper we talked about but I think this is an important background so they did something that at the time I didn't really notice I didn't notice what they did I probably did and I forgot but I didn't notice this until about five years ago when I went back and looked at the paper and they did something called um uh informative censoring so the way the study worked is if you were put on Metformin we're gonna follow you if you're not on Metformin we're going to follow you and we're going to track the number of deaths from any cause that occurred this is called all-cause mortality or ACM and it's really the gold standard in a trial of this nature or a study of this nature or even a clinical trial you want to know how much are people dying from anything because we're trying to prevent or delay death of all causes informative censoring says if a person who's on Metformin deviates from that inclusion criteria we will not count them in the final assessment so how are the ways that that can happen well one the person can be lost to follow up two they can just stop taking their metformin three and more commonly they can progress to needing a more significant drug so all of those patients were excluded from the study so think about that for a moment this is in my opinion a significant limitation of this study because what you're basically doing is saying we're only going to consider the patients who were on Metformin stayed on Metformin and never progressed through it and we're going to compare those to people who were not having type 2 diabetes so an analogy here would be imagine we're going to do a study of two groups that we think are almost identical one of them are smokers and the other are identical in every way but they're not smokers and we're going to follow them to see which ones get lung cancer but every time somebody dies in The Smoking group we stop counting them when you get to the end you're going to have a less significant view of the health status of that group so with that caveat the banister study found a very interesting result which was the crude death rate um was and by the way the way these are done this is also one of the challenges of epidemiology is the math gets much more complicated you have to normalize death rate for the amount of time you study the people so everything is normalized to thousand person years so the crude death rate in the group of people with type 2 diabetes who were on Metformin including the censoring was 14.4 so 14.4 deaths occurred per thousand patient years if you look at the control group it was 15.2 this was a startling result and I remember reading this in again 2014 and being like holy crap this is really amazing is there um could you explain why because I I hear those numbers and they don't seem that striking it's a difference of about a year and a half now of course um a difference of about a year and a half in lifespan is is well it is remarkable it doesn't even translate to that so so taking a step back type 2 diabetes on average will shorten your life by six years I see so that's the Actuarial difference between having type 2 diabetes and not all comers but you're right this is not a huge difference it's only a difference of a little less than one year of Life per thousand patient years studied okay and by the way up here just point out my my math was wrong when I said about a year and a half but but the point here is you would expect the people in the metformin group to have a far worse outcome I.E to have a far worse crude death rate and the fact that it was statistically significant in the other direction and it turned out on the What's called the Cox proportional Hazard which is where you actually model the difference in lifespan the people who took metformin and had diabetes had a 15 one five fifteen percent relative reduction in all-cause death over 2.8 years which was the median duration of follow-up well that seems to be the number that makes me go wow yeah right that um because could you repeat those numbers again yep so 15 reduction in all-cause mortality over 2.8 years that's a big deal it is and again there's no clear explanation for it unless you believe that metformin is doing something Beyond helping you lower blood glucose because the difference in blood glucose between these two people was still in favor of the non-diabetics so again the proponents of Metformin being a zero protective agent and I put myself in this category at one point I would put myself today in the category of undecided but at the time I very much believed this was a very good suggestion that metformin was doing other things you mentioned a couple already metformin is a weak inhibitor of mtor Metformin reduces inflammation metformin potentially tamps down on senescent cells and their secretory products you know there are lots of things metformin could be doing that are off Target and it might be that those things are conferring the advantage as many of you know I've been taking ag1 daily since 2012. so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast ag1 is a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that's designed to meet all of your foundational nutrition needs now of course I try to get enough servings of vitamins and minerals through whole food sources that include vegetables and fruits every day but oftentimes I simply can't get enough servings but with ag1 I'm sure to get enough vitamins and minerals and the probiotics that I need and it also contains adaptogens to help buffer stress simply put I always feel better when I take ag1 I have more focus and energy and I sleep better and it also happens to taste great for all these reasons whenever I'm asked if you could take Just One supplement what would it be I answer ag1 if you'd like to try ag1 go to drinkag1.com huberman to claim a special offer they'll give you five free travel packs plus a year supply of vitamin D3 K2 again that's drink ag1.com huberman so fast forward until a year ago and I think most people took the banister study as kind of the best evidence we have for the benefits of metformin and I'm sure you've had lots of people come up to you and ask you should I be on Metformin should I be on Metformin I mean I probably get asked that question almost as much as I'm asked any question outside of do I mean people definitely want to know if you should be consuming do but but after that it's metformin fresh off the leaves has to be while viewing morning sunlight so okay so let's so let's kind of fast forward to now the paper that I wanted to spend a few more minutes on yeah and thanks for that background I I'm still uh dazzled by the uh insertion of the straw by way of of uh insulin I I don't think I've ever heard that described I need to I need to go get a better textbook it's a pretty Short Straw In fairness you know it's just it's just a little yeah just um to give people a sense of why I'm so dazzled by I am always fascinated by how quickly how efficiently and um how specifically biology can create these little protein complexes that do something really important I mean you're talking about an on-demand creation of a portal right I mean these are cells engineering their own Machinery in real time in response to chemical signals it's great yeah but I'm I'm sort of Rusty on my Neuroscience but an action potential Works in reverse the same way like you need the ATP gradient to restore the uh to restore the gradient but once the action potential fires it's passive outside right yeah so what peer's referring to is um the way that neurons become electrically activist by the flow of ions across the from the outside the cell to inside the cell and we have both active conductances mean they're triggered by electrical changes in the gradients Via changes in electrical potential um and then their passive gradients where things can just flow back and forth until there's a balance equal inside and outside the cell I think what's um what's different is that there's some movement of a lot of stuff inside of neurons when neurotransmitters like dopamine bind to its receptor and then a bunch of you know it's like a Bucket Brigade that gets kicked off internally but it's not often that you hear about receptors getting inserted into cells very quickly normally you have to go through a process of of you know transcribing genes and making sure that the specific proteins are made and then those are long slow things that take place over the course of many hours or days what you're talking about is a real on-demand insertion of a channel and it makes sense as to why that would be required but it's just oh so very cool it's cool yeah so keys and colleagues came along and said we would like to redo the entire banister analysis um and I I think their motivation for it was the interest in this topic is through the roof there is a clinical trial called the tame trial that is I think pretty much funded now and maybe getting underway soon the tame trial which is an important trial is going to try to ask this question prospectively and through random assignment so so this is the targeting aging with metformin trial that's correct okay near barzilla uh is probably the senior Pi on that um and I think in many ways the banister study along with some other studies um but of lesser significance probably provided some of the motivation for the tame trial so they said okay look we're going to do this we're going to use a different cohort of people so the first study that we just talked about the banister study used uh I believe it was like roughly they sampled like 95 000 subjects from a UK biobank here they used a larger sample they did about half a million people sampled from a Danish Health registry and they did something pretty elegant they created two groups to study so the first was just a standard replication of what banister did which was just a group of people with and without diabetic that they tried to match as perfectly as possible but then they did a second analysis in parallel with discordant twins so same-sex twins that only differed in that one had diabetes and one didn't I thought this was very elegant because here you have a degree of genetic similarity and you have similar environmental uh factors during childhood that might give you you know allow you to see if there's any sort of difference in signal so now turning this back into a little bit of a journal Club virtually any clinical paper you're going to read table one is the characteristics of the people in the study you always want to take a look at that so when I look at table one here you can see it's and by the way just for people watching this we're going to make all these papers and figures available so if you're you know don't you know we'll have nice show notes that'll make all this clear so table one in the keys paper shows the Baseline characteristics and again it's almost always going to be the first table in a paper usually the first figure in the paper is a study design it's usually a flow chart that says these are the inclusion criteria these are all the people that got excluded this is how we randomized Etc and you can see here that there are four columns so the the first two are The Singletons these are people who are not related and then the second two are the twins who are matched and you can see remember how I said they sampled about 500 000 people you can see the numbers so they got you know 7842 Singletons on Metformin the same number then they pulled out matched without diabetes on the twins they got 976 on Metformin with diabetes and then by definition 976 co-twins without them and you look at all these characteristics what was their age upon entry how many were men what was the year of indexing when we got them what medications were they on what was their highest level of Education marital status Etc the one thing I want to call out here that really cannot be matched in a study like this so this is a very important limitation is the medication so look at look at that column Andrew notice how pretty much everything else is perfectly matched until you get to the medication list yeah it's all over the place yeah it's just you it's not even close they're not where they're nowhere near matched right in other words just to give you a couple of examples right on the and let's just talk about The Singletons because it's basically the same story on the twins if you look at what fraction of the people with type 2 diabetes are on lipid lowering medication it's 45.6 percent versus 15.4 percent in the Matched without diabetes it's a 3X difference what about anti-platelet therapy that's 30 versus 14 antihypertensive 65 percent versus 63 versus 31 because people who have one health issue and are taking metformin are likely to have other health issues exactly so this is again a fundamental flaw of epidemiology you can never remove all the confounders this is why I became an experimental scientist so that we could control variables that's right because without random assignment you cannot control every variable now you'll see in a moment when we get into the analysis they go through three levels of corrections but they can never correct this medication one so just keep that in the back of your mind okay so the two big things that were done in this experiment or in this survey or you know study to differentiate it from banister was one the twin trick which I think is pretty cool the second thing that they did was they did a sensitivity analysis with and without informative censoring so one of the things they wanted to know is hey does it really matter if we don't count the metformin patients who progress so um so let's see kind of what what transcribed so the next figure figure two pardon me the next table table two walks you through the crude uh mortality rate in each of the groups so the most important row I think in this table is the one that says crude mortality per thousand person years now you recall that in the previous study in the banister study those were on the ballpark of about 15 per okay so let's look at each of these so in the um single The Singletons with without so the non-twins who were not diabetic it was 16.86 and could you put a little more Contour on what this thousand person years what what it is are you talking about pooling the lifespans of a of of a bunch of different people until you get to the number 1000 yeah because you're normalizing not so it's not who's going to live a thousand years because everyone's expecting that um you're essentially taking so you've got some people that are going to live um 76 years 52 years 91 years and you're pooling all of those until you hit a thousand and then that becomes kind of a a a it's like a normalized division you're basically like so let's say the the control group um you're asking if there were a thousand person years available to live How likely is it that this person would live another 15. yeah so a couple ways to think about it so taking a step back we always have to have some way of normalizing so when we talk about the mortality from a disease is like cancer in the population we would we report it as what's the mortality rate per and it's typically per 100 000 persons okay that's a much more intuitive way to express it it is but the reason we can do it that way is because we're literally looking at how many people died this calendar year and we divide it by the number of people in that age group so it's typically what you're doing when you look at aged groups in buckets of like decades so that's why we can say the highest mortality is like people 90 and up even though the absolute number of deaths is small it's because there's not that many people there right the majority of deaths in absolute terms probably occur in the seventh decade but as you go up because the denominator is shrinking you have to normalize to it so we just normalized the number of people here are all the people that started the year hear all the people that ended the year what's the death rate why are these done in a slightly more complicated way because we we don't follow these people for their whole lives we're only following them for a period of observation in this case roughly three years so to say something like you know we have a crude death rate of five deaths per thousand person years one way to think about that is if you had a thousand people and you followed them for one year you'd expect five to die if you had 500 people and you followed them for two years you expect five to die if you have a thousand people and you follow them for one year you expect five to die those would all be considered equivalent mortalities great thank you for clarifying that no no this this stuff is I mean like I find I find epidemiology when you get in the weeds is way more complicated than following the basics of um experimental stuff where you just you get to push all this stuff into the garbage bin and just say we're gonna take this number of people we're gonna exclude this group we're going to randomize we're going to see what happens yeah that's what like the paper we'll talk about next so when you adjust for age and they don't show it in this table it's only in the text when you adjust for age a very important check to do is what is the crude death rate of the people on Metformin who are not twins versus who are twins now in this table they look different because it's 24.93 for the metformin group and 21.68 for the twin group in that's on Metformin when you adjust for age they're almost identical it's it goes from 29 point 24.93 to 24.7 one other point I'll make here for people who are going to be looking at this table is you'll notice there are parentheses after every one of these numbers what is that what does that offer in there those parentheses are offering the 95 confidence interval so for example to take the number you know 24.93 is the crude death rate of how many people are dying who take Metformin what it's telling you is we're 95 confident that the actual number is between 23.23 and 26.64 if a 95 confidence interval does not cross the number zero it's statistically significant okay so the first thing that just jumps out at you I think when you look at this is there's clearly a difference here between the people who have diabetes and those who don't it complicates the study a little bit because it's basically two studies in one but you're comparing um 95 pardon me uh 24.93 to 16.86 which by the way remains after age adjustment when you go to the twin group it's 24.73 to 12.94 so maybe just to zoom out for that what you're describing if I understand correctly is this um uh crude deaths per 1000 person years let's just talk about The Singletons the non yes is 16.86 so 16.86 people die and some people probably think how can 0.86 of a person die well it's not always whole numbers but um there's a there's a bad joke to be made here but yeah just call it 17 versus 25 right 17 deaths per thousand versus 25 deaths yep and the 25 is in the folks that took metformin now that to the naive listener and to me means oh you know metformin basically kills you right um not a faster or you know you're more likely to die but we have to remember that these people have another they have a major health issue that the other group does not have that's right because people weren't assigned drug or not assigned drug it wasn't Placebo drug it's let's look at people taking this drug for a bad health issue and compare to everyone else that's right so now you have to go into and and I'll just sort of skip the next figure but the next figure is a Kaplan Meyer curve I I think it's actually worth looking at it because they show up in all sorts of studies so if you look at figure one it's a Kaplan Meyer curve which is a mortality curve so you'll see these in any study that is looking at death and this can be prospective randomized this can be retrospective but these are always going to show up and I think it's really worth understanding what a kaplan-meyer curve shows you so when the x-axis is always time and on the y-axis is always the cumulative survival so it's a curve that always goes from zero to one one or one hundred percent and it's always decreasing monotonically meaning it can only go down or stay flat it can never go back up so that's what a cumulative mortality curve looks like now we're looking at you're starting at alive and you're looking at how many people die for every year that passes that's right and in each curve there's one on the left which is the Matched Singletons and there's a one on the right which are the discordant twins you have two lines you have those that were on Metformin with type 2 diabetes and you have their matched controls and in this figure the Matched controls are the darker lines and the people with type 2 diabetes on Metformin that's the lighter line you'll also notice and I like the way they've done it here they've got shading around each one and we should mention for those that are just listening that in both of these graphs the downward trending line from the controls so again non-diabetic not taking metformin is above the line corresponding to the diabetics who are taking metformin um put crudely um the people who are taking metformin that have diabetes are dying at a faster rate for every single year exam and the two lines do not overlap except at the beginning when everyone's alive it's like a foot race where basically the people with metformin and diabetes are falling behind and dying as they fall that's right and I'm glad you brought up a good point it's not uncommon in treatments uh to see kaplan-meyer curbs cross they don't have to it's not a requirement that they never cross it's only a a requirement that they're monotonically decreasing or staying flat so I've seen cancer treatment drugs where they have like two drugs going head-to-head in a cancer treatment and like one starts out looking really really bad but then all of a sudden it kind of flattens well the other one goes bad and then it actually crosses and goes underneath but that's not the case here so to your point the people with diabetes taking metformin in both the match Singletons and the discordants are dropping much faster and they always stay below and I was just going to say that the shading is just showing you a 95 confidence interval so you're just putting basically error bars along this so if this were experimental data if you were doing an experiment with a group of mice and you were watching their survival and you were you know what you'd have error bars on this which you're actually measuring so this is because you have much more data here you're just showing this in this fashion for those that haven't um been familiarized statistics no problem um error bars correspond to like if you're just going to measure the heights of a room full of 10th graders there's going to be a range right you'll have the very tall kid and the and the Very uh shorter kid and you know the short kid and the medium kit and you'll and so there's a range there's gonna be an average a mean and then there'll be standard deviations and standard errors and um uh so these confidence intervals just give a sense of how much range you know some people um die die early some people dilate within a given year they're going to be different ages um so it these error bars can account for a lot of different forms of variability here you're talking about the variability is how many people in each group die we're not tracking one diabetic taking metformin versus a control I I should have asked this earlier earlier but well and it's also a mathematical model at this point too that's smoothing it out because notice it's running for the full eight years even though they're only following people for you know typically I think the median was like three or four years at a time so they're using this quite complicated type of mathematics called A Cox proportional Hazard which is what generates Hazard ratios and basically any model has to have some error in it and so they're basically saying this is the error so you could argue when you look at that figure we don't know exactly where the line is in there but we know it's in that shaded area if those shaded areas overlapped you couldn't really make the conclusion you wouldn't know for sure that one is different from the other yeah that's actually a good opportunity to um to uh raise a common myth which is a lot of people when they look at a paper let's say it's a bar graph you know um and they see these error bars and they will say people often think oh if the error bars overlap it's not a significant difference but if the error bars don't overlap meaning there's enough separation then that's a real and meaningful difference and that's not always the case it depends a lot on the form of the experiment um I often see some of the the more robust Twitter battles over you know how people are reading graphs and I think it's important to remember that um you run the statistics hopefully the correct statistics for the for the sample but determining significance whether or not the the result could be due to something other than chance of course your confidence in that increases as it becomes typically p-values P less than point zero zero zero zero one percent chance that it's due um chance right so very low probability P less than 0.05 tends to be the kind of gold standard cut off um but when you're talking about data like these which are repeated measures over time people are dropping out literally um over time you're saying they've modeled it to make predictions as to what would happen we're not necessarily looking at you know raw data points here yeah the raw data was in the previous table that's now taken and run through this Cox model and it's smoothed out got it and to your point about the bar graphs yeah I think the other thing you always want to understand is just because something doesn't achieve statistical significance the only way you can say it's not significant is you have to know what it was powered to detect um and statistical power is a very important concept that probably doesn't get discussed enough but before you do an experiment you have to have an expectation of what you believe the difference is between the groups and you have to determine the number of samples you will need to assess whether or not that difference is there or not so you use something it's called a power table and you you would go to the power table so if you if you're doing treatment a versus treatment B and you say look I think treatment a is going to have a 50 response and I think treatment B will have a 65 percent response you literally go to a power table that says 50 response 15 difference that gives you a place on the grid and I want to be 90 sure that I'm right so 90 power I'm being a little bit so there's going to be a statistician listening to this who's going to want to kill me but this is directionally the way we would describe it and that tells you this is how many animals or people you would need in this study you're going to need 147 in each group and by the way if you now do the experiment with 147 and you fail to find significance you can comfortably say there is no statistical difference at least up to that 15 percent there may be a difference at 10 but you weren't powered to look at 10 percent yeah and um very important point that you're making another Point that's just uh more General one about statistics in general the way to reduce variability in a data set is to increase sample size and that kind of makes sense right if you if I just walk into a 10th grade class and okay I'm going to measure height and I'd buy the first three kids that I see and I happen to look over there and it's the three that all play on the volleyball team together I my sample size is small and I'm likely to get a skewed representation in this case taller than average so increasing sample size tends to decrease variation so the that's why when you hear about a study from the UK biobank or from you know half a million Danish citizens like for instance in this study that's those are enormous sample sizes so even though this is uh not an experimental study it's an epidemiological observational study um there's tremendous Power by way of the enormous number of subjects and that's the way that epidemiology will make up for its deficit so you could never do a randomized assignment study on half a million people um you know so so epidemiology makes up for its biggest limitation which is it can never compensate for inherent biases by saying we can do infinite duration if we want like we could we could survey people over the course of their lives and we can have the biggest sample size possible because this is relatively cheap the cost of actually doing an experiment where you have tens of thousands of people is prohibitive I mean if you look at the women's health initiative which was a five-year study on I don't know what was it 50 000 women I mean was a billion dollar study so this is this is The Balancing Act between epidemiology and randomized prospective experiments and uh they so they both offer something but you just have to know their blind spots of each one I'd like to take a quick break and acknowledge our sponsor inside tracker inside tracker is a personalized nutrition platform that analyzes data from your blood and DNA to help you better understand your body and help you meet your health goals I'm a big believer in getting regular blood work done for the simple reason that many of the factors that impact your immediate and long-term Health can only be analyzed from a quality blood test however with a lot of blood tests out there you get information back about blood lipids about hormones and so on but you don't know what to do with that information with inside tracker they have a personalized platform that makes it very easy to understand your data that is to understand what those lipids what those hormone levels etc mean and behavioral supplement nutrition and other protocols to adjust those numbers to bring them into the ranges that are ideal for your immediate and long-term Health Insight tracker's ultimate plan now includes measures of both APO B and of insulin which are key indicators of cardiovascular health and energy regulation if you'd like to try inside tracker you can visit insidetracker.com huberman to get 20 off any of inside trackers plans again that's inside tracker.com huberman to get 20 off so let's just kind of wrap this up I mean I think let's just go to table four which I think is the most important table um in in here which now lays out the the final results in terms of the hazard ratio so this is this is the way we want to really be thinking about this so again Hazard ratios um these are important things to understand a hazard ratio is a number and you always subtract one from the hazard ratio and that tells you if it's a positive number if it's a number sorry if it's a number greater than one you subtract one and that tells you the relative harm so if it has a ratio is 1.5 you subtract 1.5 is a 50 increase in Risk um if the number is negative you may recall on the banister paper the hazard ratio was 0.85 so if it's nothing so that means it's a 15 reduction in relative risk and here you can see all the hazard ratios are positive so what it's telling you here is and I'm going to walk through this because it's there's a lot of information packed here you've got Singletons you've got twins they're showing you three different ways that they do it they do an unadjusted model if you just look at The Singletons with and without metformin and you make no adjustments the hazard ratio is 1.48 meaning the people on Metformin had a 48 greater chance of dying in any given year than their non-diabetic counterpart the only reason I'm smiling it's not because I enjoy people dying quite quite to the contrary is that um this is novel for me that I've read some epidemiological studies before but it's not normally where I spend the majority of my time but up until now I was thinking okay people taking metformin are dying more more than those that aren't I just and I I'm just relieved to know that I wasn't um looking at all this backwards okay so they're dying more but of course we don't have a group that's taking metformin who doesn't have diabetes and we don't have a group um who uh has diabetes and you know is taking metformin plus something else so again we're only dealing with these constrained yeah now there's a lot of other arm to this study that I'm not getting into because it adds more complexity which is they also have another group that's got diabetes takes metformin and takes sulfona ureas which is a bigger drug and those people die even more whoa so which again speaks to the point right the more you need these medications they're never able to erase the effect of diabetes but in this case it seems that they might be accelerating possibly accelerating death due to diabetes possible we could never know that from this because we're we don't see we would need to see diabetics who don't take Metformin who take nothing and I would bet that they would do even worse so my intuition is that the metformin is helping but not helping nearly as much as we thought before so my point is they make another set of adjustments they say okay well look in the first one in the unadjusted model we only matched for age and gender okay that's pretty crude what if we adjust for the medications they're on the cardiovascular psychiatric pulmonary dementia meds and marital status I don't know why they threw marital status in there but they did I don't know maybe being married or unmarried I'm sure but it just seems like a random thing to throw in with all their meds I would have personally done that adjustment higher up but nevertheless if you do that all of a sudden the uh Hazard ratio drops from 1.48 to 1.32 which means yep you still have a 32 percent greater chance of dying in any given year all right what if we also adjust for the highest level of Education along with any of the other covariates well that doesn't really change it at all it ends up at 1.33 or a 33 chance increase in depth okay I always knew that more school wasn't going to save me was it's not doing jack so now let's do it for the twins if you do the twin study which you could argue is a slightly pure study because you at least have one genetic and environmental thing that you've attached the unadjusted model is brutal 2.15 that's a hundred and fifteen percent think about this these are twins who in theory are the same in every way except one has diabetes and one doesn't and the one with diabetes on Metformin still has 115 percent greater chance of dying than the non-diabetic co-twin when you make that first adjustment of all the meds and marital status you bring it down to a 70 increase in risk and when you throw education in it goes up to an 80 chance of risk now they did this really cool thing which was they did the analysis on with and without censoring so everything I just said here was based on no censoring tell me about censoring censoring is when you stop counting the metformin people who have died Okay so in the Singleton group when you unadjust it and the reason I'm doing the unadjusted is that's where they did the sensitivity analysis I don't think it really matters that much it's you just have to draw a line in the sand somewhere you'll recall that that was a 48 chance of increased mortality all-cause mortality if you stop counting if you if you apparently if you don't censor meaning if you include everybody including when people on Metformin with diabetes die if you censor them it comes down to 1.39 in other words this is a very important finding it did not undo the benefits that we saw in the banister study banister saw a 15 reduction in mortality when they censored when Keys censored it got better but not that much better it went from 48 to 39 in the twins it went from a hundred and fifteen percent down to only 97 percent so in some ways this presents a little bit of an enigma because it's not entirely clear to me having read these papers many times exactly why banister found such an outlined like such a different response there's another there's another technical detail of this paper which is they you can see on the right side of table four they did something called a nested case control but you'll see and I was going to go into a long explanation of what nested case controls are it's another pretty elegant way to do case control studies where you sample by year and you you you sort of normalize you you don't count all the cases at the end you count them one by one I don't think it's worth getting into Andrew because it doesn't change the answer you can see it changes it just slightly but it doesn't change the point the point here is the keys paper makes it undeniably clear that in that population there was no Advantage offered by metformin that undid the disadvantage of having type 2 diabetes this does not mean that metformin wasn't helping them because we don't know what these people would have been like without metformin it could be that this bought them a 50 reduction in relative mortality to where they'd been but what it says is in my way this is what you would have expected this is what you would have expected 10 years ago before the banister paper came out or maybe even before metformin was used because in some ways it's saying um what is the likelihood that sick people who are on a lot of medication are going to die compared to not sick people who aren't on a lot of medication yep wanna you know it's not quite that simple in the in the sense that as you said there are ways to um try and isolate the metformin contribution somewhat um because they're on a bunch of other meds um and presumably that was done and analyzed in in other figures that where they they can sort of try and they can never attach the results specifically to metformin right but um there must be some way of waiting the percentage that are on psychiatric meds or not on psychiatric medicine some way to tease out whether or not there's actually some contribution to metformin to this result well that's what they're doing in in be in the in the partial adjustment is they're actually com they're actually doing their best to say oh right married or not married they're going variable drug by drug all the way through high blood pressure non-high blood pressure smoking non-smoking Etc right and the way they would do that presumably is um by saying okay married not married that's why that's a simple one um are you on lipid lowering meds yes or no okay you are not you are not they and then comparing those groups yeah yeah okay so no no differences jumping out that can be purely explained by these other variables yes although again this is a this is a great opportunity to talk about why no matter how slick you are no matter how slick your model is you can't control for everything there's a reason that to my knowledge virtually every study that compares meat eaters to non-meat eaters finds an advantage amongst the non-meat eaters and we can talk about lifespan Advantage yes and we can or disease you know incidence uh studies and yeah it might be tempting to say well therefore eating meat is bad um Until you realize that it takes a lot of work to not eat meat that's a very very significant decision that a person for most people that's a very significant decision a person makes and for a person to make that decision they probably have a very high conviction about the benefit of that to their health and it is probably the case that they're making other changes with respect to their health as well that are a little more difficult to measure now there's a million other problems with that I picked a silly example because the whole meat discussion then gets into well you know when when we say eating meat what do we mean like this document is like deli meat versus grass-fed exactly you know a deer that you hunted with your bow how do we get into all those things but my point is it's very difficult to quantify some of the intangible differences and I think that even a study that goes to Great Lengths as this one does epidemiologically to make these Corrections can never make the corrections and so for me the big takeaway of this study is one this makes much more sense to me than the banister paper which never really made sense to me and again I was first critical of the banister paper in 2018 about four years after it came out that's about the time I stopped taking metformin by the way I stopped taking it for a different reason which we can talk about in a sec but um that was the first time I went back and said wait a minute this information this this informative censoring thing is that's a little fishy and I think we weren't looking at a true group of real type 2 diabetics now that said maybe it doesn't matter in other words maybe and even the keys paper doesn't tell us that metformin wouldn't be beneficial because it could be that those people if they were on nothing as their matched cohorts were on nothing would have been dying at you know a hazard ratio of three and this brought it down to 1.5 in which case you would say there is some zero protection there it is putting the brakes on this process all of this is to say absent a randomized control trial we will never know the answer has there been a randomized control trial not when it comes to a hard outcome now there has been in the ITP so the interventions testing program uh which is kind of the gold standard for animal uh studies which is run out of three Labs so it's it's an nih-funded program that's run out of three labs they um they basically test molecules for zero protection um the ITP was the first study that really put rapid mice on the map in 2009 that was the study that's fortuitously demonstrated that even when ravamycin was given very very late in life it was given to 60 month old mice it still afforded them a 15 uh lifespan extension has a similar style you've been done in humans I mean it's hard I mean it's a hard no I mean you can't really control with rapper mice no um but when the ITP studied metformin it did not succeed so the the there have not been that many drugs that have worked in the ITP the IDP is very rigorous right it's a it doesn't use an inbred strain of mice it is done concurrently in three Labs with very large sample sizing and so when something works in the ITP it's pretty exciting rapamycin has been studied several times it's always worked another one we should talk about at a subsequent time is 17 Alpha estradiol this continues to work in male mice and it produces comparable effects to rapamycin estrogen doesn't work in female rights but this is Alpha not beta so this is 17 Alpha estradiol not beta estradiol which is the estradiol that we all that is bioavailable in all of us and and uh just as a brief aside um I think you and I basically agree that um unless it's a problem males we're talking post-puberty um should try and have their estrogen as high as possible without having negative symptomology because of the importance of estrogen for libido for brain function tissue bone health bone health body because this idea of crushing estrogen and raising testosterone is just silly right there's not and let's just leave raising testosterone out of it but many of the approaches to raising testosterone that are pharmacologic in nature also raise estrogen a lot of people try and push down on estrogen and that is just again unless people are getting um hyperestrogenic effects like gynecomastia or other issues is the exact wrong direction to go you want estrogen estrogen is a very important hormone for men and women um canaga flows in an sglt2 inhibitor also very successful in the ITP but again interestingly rapid metformin not so metformin has failed in the ITP so you no longer taking metformin I stopped five years ago I mean you're not a diabetic so presumably you're taking I was taking it for a durable protection to buffer blood glucose yeah and ultimately potentially live longer yes exactly and the reason I stopped and this will be the last thing before we move on well because you couldn't go to the Dairy Queen at the Buffett event no finally the nausea went away after a few weeks or a month maybe um but once I got really into lactate testing I noticed how high my lactate was uh at rest so a resting fasted lactate should be in a healthy person should be below one like somewhere between 0.3.6 millimole and only when you start to exercise should lactate go up and in 2018 was when I started blood testing for my zone two so previously when I was doing zone two testing I was just going off my power meter and heart rate but this is when this is after I met Inigo San Milan and I started like wanting to use the lactate threshold of two millimole as my as my determinant of where to put my wattage on the bike and I'm like doing finger Pricks before I start and I'm like 1.6 millimole and I'm like what the hell is going on I can't be 1.6 but ran the a flight of stairs up the back of the Empire State Building well no that would put me a lot higher right but but and and being generous to your Fitness no but but but that's when I started digging a little digging and realized oh you know what this totally makes sense if you have a weak mitochondrial toxin what are you going to do you're gonna shunt more glucose into pyruvate and more pyruvate into lactate I'm I'm anaerobic yeah fuel source that's right so and then my zone two numbers just seemed off my lactation could you feel it sorry I didn't know can you feel it in your body because maybe now I'll just briefly describe I took berberine um I um During the period of maybe somewhere in the 2012 to 2015 stretch I don't recall what are you taking it for well I'll tell you so I I was and I still am a big fan of Tim ferriss's uh slow carbohydrate diet because I like to eat meat and vegetables and starches I'm an omnivore um and I found that it worked very quickly got me very lean I could exercise I could think I could sleep all you know a lot of my rationale for following one eating regimen or another what I eat is to enjoy myself but also have mental energy I mean because if I can't sleep at night I'm not going to replenish I'm not I don't replenish I'm gonna feel like garbage I don't care how lean I am or what you know um so I found the Slow Carb Diet to be um which was in the four hour body to be a very good plan for me it's pretty easy you drop some things like bread Etc you don't drink calories except after a resistance training session Etc but one day a week you have this so-called cheat day and on the cheat day anything goes and so I would eat you know eight croissants and then I'd alternate to sweet stuff and then I go to a piece and by the end of the day you don't want to look at an item of food at all so the only modification I made to this slow carb diet for our body thing was the day after the cheat day I wouldn't eat I would just fast and I had no problem doing that because it was just basically well since you said um uh what was it anal um analc was I did not have that but since you said that I um I won't up the ante here but I'll at least match your anal seepage comment by saying I had let's just call it profound gastric distress after eating like that the next day so the last thing you want to do is eat any food I'll just hydrate and oftentimes to try and get some exercise um and what I read was that berberine Poor Man's metformin could buffer blood glucose and in some ways make me feel less sick when ingesting all these calories in in many cases um spiking my my blood sugar and Insulin um because you're having ice cream and you know Etc and indeed it worked so if I took berberine and I don't recall the milligram count and then I ate you know 12 donuts I felt fine it was as if I had eaten one donut wow I felt sort of okay in my body and I felt much much better now um presumably because it's buffering the spikes in blood sugar I wasn't crashing in the afternoon nap and that whole thing and do you remember how much you were taking I think it was a couple hundred milligrams does that sound about right um there's a bright yellow capsule um I forget the source but in any case one thing I noticed was that if I took berberine and I did not ingest a profound number of carbohydrates very soon afterwards I got brutal headaches I think I was hypoglycemic I didn't measure it but I just felt I had headaches I didn't feel good and then I would eat a pizza or two and feel fine and so I realized that berberine was putting me on this kind of lower blood sugar state that was the logic anyway and it allowed me to eat these cheat Foods um but when I cycled off of the the four out because I I don't follow the slow carbide anymore although I might again at some point um when I stopped doing those cheat days uh I didn't have any reason to take the berberine and I feared that I wasn't ingesting enough carbohydrates in order to really justify trying to buffer my blood glucose also my blood glucose tends to be did you ever did you ever try a carbos no what is that so A carbos is another glucose disposal yeah it's actually a drug that but it works more in the gut and it just prevents glucose absorption uh a carbos is another one of those drugs that actually found a survival benefit in the ITP and it was a very interesting finding because the the thesis for testing it the ITP is a very clever system anybody can nominate a candidate to be tested then the you know the panel over there reviews it and they decide Yep this is interesting we'll go ahead and study it so when I think David Allison nominated uh a car bus to be studied the rationale was it would be a caloric restriction mimetic because you would literally just fail to absorb I don't know make up some number right 15 to 20 percent of your carbohydrates would not be absorbed and therefore you would the mice would effectively be calorically restricted it would pass them out that's right and what happened was really interesting one the mice lived longer on a carbos but two they didn't weigh any less so it what it they lived longer but not through calorie restriction that's interesting yes and it the the speculation is they lived longer because they had lower glucose in lower insulin and I don't want to send this down some rabbit holes here but there are all sorts of interesting ideas about um for instance that some forms of dementia might be so-called type 3 diabetes the diabetes of the brain and so things like berberine metformin lowering blood glucose ketogenic diets Etc might be beneficial there I mean there's a lot to explore here and I know you've explored a lot of that on your podcast I've done far less of that but well at least it seems that we know the following things for sure one you don't want insulin too high nor too low you don't want blood glucose too high nor too low if the buffering systems for that are disrupted clearly exercise meaning regular exercise is the best way to keep that system in check but in the absence of that tool or I would say in addition to that tool is there any glucose disposal agent because that's what we're talking about here metformin berberine a carbocy etc that you take on a regular basis because you have that much confidence in it the only one that I take is an sglt2 inhibitor um so this is a class of drug that is used by people with type 2 diabetes but which I don't have but because of my faith in the mechanistic studies of this drug coupled with its results in the ITP coupled with the human trial results that show profound benefit in non-diabetics taking it even for heart failure I think there's something very special about that drug I've actually that was another paper I was thinking about presenting this time maybe we'll do that the next time but do you believe in caloric restriction as a way to extend life or are you more of the do the right behaviors and that's covered in your book outlive and Elsewhere on your podcast um and buffer blood glucose is do you still obviously you believe in buffering blood glucose in addition to just doing all the right behaviors yeah I think you can uncouple a little bit the buffering of blood glucose from the caloric deficit so um I think you can be in a reasonable energy balance and buffer glucose with good sleep hygiene lots of exercise and just thoughtful eating without having to go into a calorie deficit so you know it's not entirely clear if profound caloric restriction would offer a survival advantage to humans even if it were tolerable to most which it's not right so for most people it's just kind of off the table right like if I said Andrew you need to eat 30 fewer calories for the rest of your life I'll live 30 fewer Years thank you yeah like there's just not many people who are willing to sign up for that so it's kind of a moot point um but the question is you know do you need to be fasting all the time do you need to be doing all of these other things and the answer appears to be outside of using them as tools to manage energy balance it's not clear right an energy balance probably plays a greater role in glucose homeostasis then from a nutrition standpoint then the individual constituents of the meal um now that's not entirely true like I can imagine a scenario where a person could be in a negative energy balance eating Twix bars all day and drinking you know big gulps but I also don't think that's a very sustainable thing to do because if by definition I'm going to put you in negative energy balance consuming that much crap I'm gonna destroy you like you're gonna feel so miserable you're going to be starving right you're not going to be satiated eating pure garbage and being in caloric deficit you're going to end up having to go into caloric excess so that's why it's an interesting thought experiment I don't think it's a very practical experiment for a person to be generally satiated and an energy balanced they're probably eating about the right stuff but I don't think that the specific macros matter as much as I used to think I'm a Believer in getting most of my nutrients from unprocessed or minimally processed sources simply because it allows me to eat Foods I like yeah and more of them and I just love to eat I I so physically enjoy the sensation of chewing that you know I'll just eat cucumber slices for prefer fun yeah right you know that's I mean that's not my only form of fun fortunately um this is an amazing paper um for the simple reason that it provides a wonderful tutorial of the benefits and drawbacks of this type of work and I think it's also wonderful because we hear a lot about metformin rapamycin and um these anti-aging approaches but I was not aware that there was any study of such a large population of people so it's pretty interesting yeah so I think it remains to be seen if and my patients often ask me hey should I be on Metformin and I give them a much much much much shorter version of what we just talked about and I say look if the tame study which should answer this question more definitively right this is taking a group of non-diabetics and randomizing them to Placebo versus metformin and studying for specific disease outcomes if the tame study ends up demonstrating that there is a zero protective benefit of Metformin I'll reconsider everything right so I think that's you know we just have to I think all walk around with an appropriate degree of humility around what we know and what we don't know but but I would say right now the epidemiology the animal data my own personal experience with its impact on my lactate production and exercise performance we could there's a whole other rabbit hole we could go down another time which is the impact on hypertrophy and strength which appears to be attenuated as well by metformin um you know I'll I'll I still prescribe it to patients all the time if they're insulin resistant for sure it's still a valuable drug but I don't think of it as a great tool for the person who's insulin sensitive and exercising a lot can't help but ask this question do you think there's any longevity benefit to short periods of caloric restriction um you know so for instance I decide to by the way I haven't done this but let's say I were to decide to you know fast and do a one meal a day type thing where I'm going to be in a slight caloric deficit you know 500 to 1000 calories for a couple of days and then go back to eating um the way that I eat before that short caloric restriction slash fast is there any benefit to it in terms of cellular Health can you you know so reset the system is there any idea that the the changes the clearing of senescent cells that we hear about autophagy that we you know that in the short term you can glean a lot of benefits and then go back to to your regular pattern of eating and then periodically you know once every couple of weeks or once a month just you know fast for a day or two is there any benefit to that that's that's purely in the domain of longevity not because there's all discipline function there there's a flexibility function there's probably an insulin sensitivity function but is there any evidence that it can help us live longer I think the short answer is no um for two reasons one I don't think that that duration would be sufficient if if one is going to take that approach but two um even if you went with something longer like what I used to do right I used to do seven days of water only per quarter three days per month so I was but I was basically always like it would be three day fast three day fast seven day fast just imagine doing that all year rotating rotating routing for many years I did that um now I certainly believed and to this day I would say I have no idea if that provided a benefit but my thesis was the downside of this is relatively circumscribed which is profound misery for a few days and what I didn't appreciate the time which I obviously now look back at and realize is muscle mass lost you're just it's very difficult to gain back the muscle cumulatively after all of that loss but my thought was exactly as you said like there's got to be a resetting of the system here this must be sufficiently long enough to trigger all of those systems but you're getting at a bigger problem with geoscience which I'm really hoping the epigenetic field comes to the rescue on it has not come close to it to date which is we don't have biomarkers around true metrics of Aging everything we have to date stinks so we're really good at using molecules or interventions for which we have biomarkers right like when you lift weights you can look at how much weight you're lifting you can look at your dexa scan and see how much muscle mass you're generating like those are biomarkers those are giving you outputs that say my input is good or my input needs to be modified when you take a sleep supplement you can look at your eight sleep and go oh my sleep is getting better like there's a biomarker um when you take Metformin when you take rapamycin when you fast we don't have a biomarker that gives us any insight into whether or not we're moving in the right direction and if we are are we taking enough just don't know so I I often get asked like what's the single most important topic you would want to see more research dollars put to in terms of this space and it's unquestionably this as unsexy as it is like who cares about biomarkers but like without them I don't think we're going to get great answers because you can't do most of the experiments you and I would dream up got it well I'm grateful that you're sitting across the table for me telling me all this and that um everyone can hear this but again we will put a link to the papers plural that Peter just described and for those of you that are listening and not watching um hopefully you were able to track the the general themes and takeaways and it is fun to go to these papers you see these big stacks of numbers and and it can be a little bit overwhelming but um my uh additional suggestion on parsing papers is notice that Peter said that he spent you know he's read it several times unlike a newspaper article or or a Instagram post with a paper you're not necessarily going to get it the first time you certainly won't get everything so that I I think spending some time with papers for me means reading it and then reading it again a little bit later or tell me yeah I was just about to say what's your because because I kind of have a way that I do it but I'm curious as to how you do it like if you're if you're encountering a paper for the first time what do you have an order in which you like to go through the do you want do you read it sequentially or do you look at the figures first I mean how do you how do you go through it yeah unless it's an area that I know very very well where I can you know Skip to some things um before reading it the whole way through um my process is always the same and actually this is fun because I used to teach a class when I was a professor at UC San Diego um called neural circuits and health and disease and it was an evening course that grew very quickly from 50 students to 400 plus students and we would do exactly this we would parse papers and um and I had everyone ask what I called the four questions um and it wasn't exactly four questions but I have a little three by five card next to me or a piece of main map by 11 paper typically and when I sit down with a paper I want to figure out what is the question they're asking what's the general question what's the specific question and I write down the question then what was the approach you know how did they test that question and sometimes that can get a bit detailed you can get into immunos chemistry and they did a you know PCR for this it it's not so important for most people that they understand every method but it is worthwhile that if you encounter a method like PCR or um you know chromatography or fmri that you at least look up on the Internet what its purpose is okay that will help a lot and then it was what they found and there you can usually figure out what they believe they found Anyway by reading the figure headers right what are you know figure one here's the header that typically if it's an experimental paper it will tell you what they want you to to think they found and then I tend to want to know the conclusion of the study and then this is really the key one and this is the one that would really distinguish the high performing students from the others you have to go back at the end and ask whether or not the conclusions the major conclusions drawn in the paper are really substantiated by what they found and what they did and that involves some thinking it involves really you know spending some time thinking about what what they identified now this isn't something that anyone can do straight off the bat it's a skill that you develop over time and different papers require different formats but those four questions really form the Cornerstone of teaching undergraduates and I think graduate students as well of how to read a paper and um again it's something that can be cultivated um and it's still how I approach papers so what I do typically is I'll read title abstract ice usually then we'll skip to the figures and see how much of it I can digest without reading the text and then go back and read the text but In fairness journals great journals like science like nature oftentimes will pack so much information in the cell press journals too into each figure and it's coded with no definition of the acronyms that almost always I'm into the introduction and results within a couple of minutes wondering what the hell This Acronym is or that acronym is and it's um it's just yeah it's just wild how much um how much nomenclature there really is I can't remember was it you or was it our friend Paul Conte when he was here um who said that oh no I'm sorry it was neither it was chair of Ophthalmology at Stanford uh Dr Jeffrey Goldberg who is a guest on the podcast recently who off camera I think it was told us that if you look at the total number of words and terms that a physician leaving Medical School owns in their mind and their vocabulary it's the equivalent of like 2 two additional full languages of fluency beyond their native language so you're trilingual at least I don't know do you speak a language other than English poorly okay so you're you're at least trilingual and probably more so no one is expected to be able to parse these papers the first time through without you know substantial training yeah no I I I think that's a that's a great format and you're absolutely right I have a different way that I do it when I'm familiar with the subject matter versus when I'm not uh well again if I'm reading papers that are something that I know really well I can basically glean everything I need to know from the figures um and then sometimes I'll just do a quick skim on methods but I don't need to read the discussion I don't need to read the intro I don't need to read anything else uh if it's something that I know less about then I usually do exactly what you say I try to start with the figures I usually end up generating more questions like what what do you mean what it how what is this how did they do that and then I got to go back and read methods typically and one of the other thing that's probably worth mentioning is a lot of papers these days have supplemental information that are not attached to the paper so um you're amazed at how much stuff gets put in the supplemental section and the reason for that of course is that the journals are very uh specific on the format and length of a paper so a lot of the times when you're submitting something you know like if you want to put any additional information in there it can't go in the main article it has to go in the supplemental figure so even for this paper there were a couple of the numbers I spouted off that I had to pull out of the supplemental paper for example when they did the sensitivity analysis on the um censoring versus non-censoring that that was in the supplemental figure that was actually not even in the paper we presented well should we change this other paper yeah it's a very different sort of paper it's an experimental paper where there's a manipulation I must say I love love love this paper and I don't often say that about papers I'm so excited about this paper for so many reasons but I want to give a couple of caveats up front first of all the paper is not published yet the only reason I was able to get this paper is because it's on bioarchive there's a new trend over the last I would say five six years of people posting the papers that they've submitted to journals for peer review online so that people can look at them prior to those papers being peer reviewed so there is a strong possibility that the final version of this paper which again we will provide a link to is going to look different maybe even quite a bit different than the one that we're going to discuss nonetheless there are a couple of things that make me confident in the data that we're about to talk about first of all the group that published this paper is really playing in their wheelhouse this is what they do and they publish a lot of really nice papers in this area um I'm going to mispronounce um her first name but I think it's chaosi goo at um who's at the econ School of Medicine Mount Sinai runs a laboratory there studying Addiction in humans and um the first off author of the paper is over Pearl this paper is wild and I'll just give you a couple of the takeaways first as a bit of a hook to hopefully uh entice people into listening further because this is an important paper this paper basically addresses how our beliefs about the drugs we take impacts how they affect us at a real level not just at a subjective level but at a biological level so just to back up a little bit a former guest on this podcast Dr Ali Crum whose name is actually Aaliyah crumb but she goes by Ali Crum talked about belief effects belief effects are different than Placebo effects Placebo effects are really just category effects it's okay I'm gonna give you this pill Peter and I'm going to tell you that this pill is molecule x5952 and that it's going to make your memory better and then I give you a memory test right and your group performs better than the people in the control group who I give a pill to and I say this is just a placebo or there are other variants on this where people will get a drug and you tell them it's Placebo they'll get a placebo you tell them it's drug it's it's a binary thing it's an on or off thing you're either in the drug group or the placebo group and you're either told that you're getting drug or Placebo and we know that Placebo effects exist in fact one of the crueler ones I was never the subject of this but there was kind of lore in high school that you know like kids would do this mean thing it's a form of bullying I really don't like it where you know they get some kid at a party to drink um alcohol-free beer and then that kid would start acting drunk and then they'd go gotcha you know it doesn't even have alcohol in it now that's a mean joke um and just reminds me of some of the the uh the horrors of high school maybe that's why I didn't go very often which I also don't suggest but no it um it's a mean joke but it speaks to the placebo effect right and there's also a social context effect so Placebo effects are real um we know this belief effects are different belief effects are not a or b Placebo or non Placebo belief effects have a lot of knowledge to enrich one's belief about a certain something that can shift their Psychology and Physiology one way or the other and I think the best examples of these really of these belief effects really do come from alichrom's Lab in the psychology department at Stanford although some of this work she did prior to getting to Stanford for instance if people are put into a group where they watch A Brief video just a few minutes of video about how stress really limits our performance let's say an archery or at mathematics or at music or at public speaking and then you test them in any of those domains or other domains in a stressful circumstance they perform less well okay and we know they perform less well because we're by virtue of a heightened stress response you can measure heart rate you can measure stroke volume of the heart you can measure um peripheral blood flow which goes down when people are stressed narrowing a vision Etc you take a different group of people and randomly assign them to another group where now they're being told that stress enhances performance it mobilizes resources it Narrows your vision such that you can perform tasks better Etc et cetera and their performance increases above a control group that receives just useless information or at least useless as it relates to the task so in both cases by the way the groups are being told the truth stress can be depleting or it can enhance performance but this is different than Placebo because now it's scaling according to the amount and the type of information that they're getting and can you give me a sense of magnitude of benefit or detriment that one could experience in a situation like the one you just described yeah so it's it's striking they're opposite in direction so the stress gets us worse makes you um let's say I think that if we were to just put a rough percentage on this it would be somewhere between 10 and 30 percent worse at performance than the control group and stress is enhancing is approximately equivalent Improvement so they're in opposite directions even more striking is the the studies that um Ali's lab did and others looking at for instance you give people a milkshake you tell it's a high calorie milkshake has a lot of nutrients and then you measure ghrelin secretion in the blood and ghrelin is a marker of hunger that increases the longer it's been since you've eaten and what you notice is that suppresses ghrelin to a great degree and for a long period of time you give another group a shake you tell them it's a low calorie Shake that it's got some nutrients in it but that doesn't have much fat not much sugar Etc they drink the shape less ghrelin's suppression and it's the same shape and it's the same Shake and satiety lines up with that also in that study and then the third one which is also pretty striking is they took hotel workers they give them a short tutorial or not informing them that moving around during the day and vacuuming and doing all that kind of thing is great it helps you lower your BMI which is great for your health you get you incentivize them and then you let them out into the wild of their everyday job you measure their activity levels the two groups don't differ they're doing roughly the same test leaning down cleaning out trash cans Etc guess what the group that was informed about the health benefits of exercise lose 12 percent more weight compared to the other group and no difference in actual movement apparently not now how could that be I mean literally this was sparked by in Ali's words you know this was sparked by her graduate advisor saying what if all the effects of exercise are Placebo right like which is which is not what anyone really believes but it's just such a you know I love that anecdote that Ali told us because it just really speaks to how like really smart people think they sit back and they go yeah like exercise obviously has benefits but like what if a lot of the benefits are that you tell yourself it's good for you and the Brain can actually activate these these mechanisms in the body and why wouldn't that be the case because the nervous system extends through both so so interesting so interesting Okay so fast forward to this study which is really about belief effects not Placebo effects and to make a long story short we know that nicotine Vaped smoked dipped or snuffed or these little Zin pouches or taken in capsule form does improve cognitive performance I'm not suggesting people run out and start doing any of those things I did a whole episode on nicotine the delivery device often will kill you some other way or is bad for you but it causes vasoconstriction which is also not good for certain people but nicotine is cognitive enhancing why well you have a couple sites in the brain namely in the basal forebrain nucleus basalus in the back of the brain structures like Locus ceruleus but also this what's called it's got a funny name the pedunculopontine nucleus which is this nucleus in the in the the pons in the back of the brain in the brain stem that sends those little axon wires into the thalamus the thalamus is a gateway for sensory information and in the thalamus the visual information the auditory information it has nicotinic receptors and when the pedunculopontine nucleus releases nicotine or when you ingest nicotine what it does is it increases the signal to noise of information coming in through your senses so the Fidelity of the signal that gets up to your cortex which is your conscious perception of those senses is increased and how much endogenous nicotine do we produce oh um well it's going to be acetylcholine bonding to nicotinic receptors I see we're not making nicotine we're not just binding so this is a this is a nicotinic acetylcholine receptor right of which there are at least seven and probably like 14 subtypes but um so right they're called nicotinic receptors in an annoying way in the same way that cannabinoid receptors are called cannabinoid receptors but then everyone thinks oh you know those receptors are there so because we're supposed to smoke pot or those receptors are there because we're supposed to ingest nicotine no the drugs that were used that's right right exactly receptor was named after the drug and so the important thing to know is that whether or not it's basal forebrain or predunculopontine nucleus or Locus ceruleus that at least in the brain because we're not talking about muscle where acetylcholine does something else via nicotinic receptors there in general it just tends to be a signal to noise enhancer and so for the non-engineering types out there no problem signal to noise just imagine I'm talking right now and there's a lot of static in the background there are two ways for you to be able to hear me more clearly we can reduce the static or I can increase the Fidelity the the volume and the clarity of what I'm saying okay um for instance and that's really what acetylcholine does that's why when people smoke a cigarette they get that boost of nicotine and they just feel clear it really works the other thing that happens is the thalamus sends information to a couple of places first of all it sends information to the reward centers of the brain the mesolympic reward pathway that releases dopamine and typically when nicotine is increased in our system dopamine goes up that's one of the reasons why nicotine is reinforcing we just like it it's a we seek it out I've done beautiful experiments with honeybees even where you know you put nicotine on certain plants or it comes from certain plants and they'll forage there more you get you know them kind of like buzzed that was upon bad pun um in any event there's also an output from this thing the thalamus to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex which is an area of the forebrain that really allows us to limit our focus and our attention for sake of learning it allows us to pay attention this is the circuit you talked about this in your fantastic podcast on stimulants yeah on ADH so ADHD typically ADHD drugs so things like Adderall Vyvanse methamphetamine for that matter um Ritalin yeah why it's counter-intuitive that a stimulant would be a treatment for someone with difficulty focusing yeah in young kids who have difficulty focusing if you give them something they love they're like a laser and the reason is that ventromedial prefrontal cortex circuit can engages when the kid is interested and engaged but kids with ADD ADHD tend to have a hard time engaging their mind for other types of tasks and other types of tasks are important for getting through life and it turns out that giving those stimulant drugs in many cases can enhance the function of that circuit and it can strengthen so that ideally the kids don't need the drugs in the long run although that's not often the way that it plays out and there are other ways to get at this you know there's now a big battle out there you know is ADHD real is it not real of course it's real does every kid need ADHD meds no are there other things like nutrition more play time outside Etc that can help improve their symptoms without drugs yes is the combination of all those things together known to be most beneficial yes are the dosages given too high and generally should be you know titrated down maybe some kids need a lot some kids need a little I probably just you know gained and lost a few enemies there so um the point is that um these circuits are hardwired circuits sorry one other question Andrew um if my memory serves correctly doesn't nicotine potentially have a calming effect as well and that seems a bit counterintuitive to the focusing one or the is it a dose effect or a timing effect how does that work yeah it's a dosing effect so the interesting thing about nicotine is that it can enhance focus in the brain but in the periphery it actually provides some muscle relaxation so it's kind of the perfect drug if you think about it again um it's it was reflecting on this how when we were growing up people would smoke on plane they had a smoking section on the plane you know people smoked all the time and now hardly anyone smokes but for all the obvious reasons but yeah it provides that really Ideal Balance between being alert but being mellow and relaxed in the body so um hence it's reinforcing properties okay this study is remarkable because what they did is they had people come into the laboratory they gave them a vape pen these are these are smokers so these are experienced smokers typically there's a washout before they come in so they're not smoking for a bit so they can clear their system of nicotine and they measure how long is that needed um typically it's a couple of days oh okay yeah um which must be miserable for those people you can't have Nicorette gum or anything no nothing they must be dying and I wonder how many cheat but they can measure they measure an oxide right they measure carbon dioxide and they're measuring nicotine in the blood as well so they do a good job there so then what they do is they have them vape and they're vaping either a low medium or high dose of nicotine the dosages don't really matter because tolerance varies Etc and then they are putting them into a functional magnetic resonance imaging machine so where they can look at it's really blood flow it's really hemodynamic response for those who want to know it's the oxygen it's the ratio of the oxygenated to deoxygenated blood because when blood blood will flow to neurons that are active to give it oxygen and then it's deoxygenated and then there's a change in what's called The Bold signal so fmri when you see these like hot spots in the brain is really just looking at blood flow and then there's some interesting physics around and I'll probably get this wrong but I'll take an attempt at it so that I get beat up a little bit by the physicists and Engineers do you remember the right hand rule yep right okay so do I have this right uh correct um the right hand rule if you put your thumb out with your first with your index finger your middle finger your thumb facing up I think that the thumb represents the charge the direction of the charge right and then isn't the electromagnetic field is the downward facing figure and then it's uh do I have that right um okay so someone will look it up but what you do is when you put a person's head in this big magnet and then you pulse the magnet what happens is the oxygenated and deoxygenated blood it interacts with the magnetic field differently and that difference in Signal can be detected and you can see that in the form of activated brain areas yeah I mean MRI all works by proton detection so presumably there's a difference in the proton signal when you have high oxygen versus low oxygen concentration yeah yeah that's right um and what they'll do is they'll pulse with the magnet because my understanding is that um and this is definitely getting beyond my expertise but that the the spin orientation of the protons then it's it's going to relax back at a different rate as well so by the relaxation at a different rate you can also get um not just resting state activation like oh look at a banana what areas of the brain light up but you can look at connectivity between areas and how one area is driving the activity of another area so very very powerful technique um so what they do is they put people in a scanner and then you'll like this because what are the what are the limitations of of fmri in terms of I mean how fine is the resolution I mean where are the blind spots of the technique so resolution you can get down to sub centimeter they talk about it always in these paper as a voxels which are these little cubic pixels um things um uh you know Sub sub centimeter but you're not going to get down to millimeter okay um there are a number of little compounds that maybe we won't go into now that have been basically worked out over the last 10 years by doing the following you can't just give somebody a stimulus compared to nothing I'll just tell you the experiment it was discovered for instance that when someone would move their right hand because when you're in the MRI and just went for one of these recently for a clinical not a problem but just for a diagnostic scan you're leaning back and you and you can move your right hand a bit and they would see an area in motor cortex lighting up but what they noticed was that the area corresponding to the left hand was also lighting up so what you really have to do is you have to look at resting state how much are they lighting up yeah and then subtract that out so now you'll always see resting state versus activation State yeah wasn't there a really funny study done as a spoof maybe a decade ago that put a dead salmon into an MRI machine and did an effect like they did an fmri of a dead salmon that demonstrated like some interesting signal no I didn't know that but but we got to find this one for the for the show notes we should do one of these wild papers ones there's there are papers of you know people putting don't do this folks putting elephants on LSD that were published in science and things like like crazy experiments we should definitely do a crazy experiments Journal Club um in any event you can get a sense of which brain areas are active and when with fairly high spatial resolution fairly high and pretty good temporal resolution on the order of hundreds of milliseconds not but it's not Ultra Ultra fast because a lot of neural transmission is happening on the you know tens of milliseconds especially when you're in talking about auditory processing okay so they put people into the scanner and then they they give them a essentially a task that's designed to engage the thalamus known to engage the thalamus reward centers and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and it's a very simple game you'll like this because um you have a background in finance you let people watch a market you know okay here's the stock market or you could say or the price of peas it doesn't really matter it goes up it goes down and they're looking at squiggle line then it stops and then they have the option but they have to pick one option they're either going to invest a certain number of the 100 units that you've given them or they can short it they can say oh it's going to go down and try and make money on the on the prediction it's going to go down you could explain shorting better than I could for sure so depending on whether or not they get the prediction right or wrong they get more points or they lose points and they're going to be rewarded in real money at the end of the experiment so this is going to engage this type of circuitry now remember these groups were given a vape pen prior to this where they've Vaped what they were told is either a low medium or high dose of nicotine and they do this task the goal is not to get them to perform better on the task the goal is to engage the specific brain areas that are relevant to this kind of error and reward type circuits and we know that this task does that so that includes the thalamus that includes the mesolympic reward pathway and dopamine it includes the ventral medial prefrontal cortex first of all they measure nicotine in the blood they are measuring how much people Vaped they were very careful about this one of the nice things about the vape pen for the sake of experiment and not recommending people Vape but they can measure how much nicotine is left in the vape pen before after they can measure how long they inhaled how long they held it in there's a lot that you can do that's harder to do with a cigarette okay they measured people's belief as to whether or not they got low medium or high amounts of nicotine and if they were told they were told they got either this is a low amount a medium amount or a high amount and then of course they looked at brain area activation during this task and what they found was very straightforward sorry they were all given the same amount yes this is this is the sneak I was going to offer it as a punch line but that's okay no I think that the the cool thing about this experiment is that the subjects are unaware that they all got the exact same amount of relatively low nicotine containing vape pen so they they basically and they're measuring it from their bloodstream so they all have fairly low levels of nicotine but one group was told you got a lot one group was told you got a medium amount and the other was told you got a little bit now a number of things happen but the most interesting things are the following first of all people's subjective feeling of being on the drug matches what they were told so if they were told hey this is a high amount of nicotine like yeah it feels like a high amount of nicotine and these are experienced smokers if it was a medium amount they're like man that feels like a medium amount if it's a low amount they think it was a low amount now that's perhaps not so surprising that's you just that's true Placebo yeah but if you look at the activation of the thalamus in the exact regions where you would predict acetylcholine transmission to impact the function of the thalamus so these include areas like What's called the centromedian nucleus the ventral posterior nucleus the names that really don't matter but these are areas involved in attention it scales with what they thought they got in the vape pen meaning if you were told that you got a low amount of nicotine you got a little bit of activation in these areas if you were told that you got a medium amount of nicotine and that's what you Vaped then you had medium amounts or moderate amounts of activation and if you were told you you got high amounts of nicotine you got a high degree of activation and the performance on the task Believe It or Not scales with it someone so keep in mind everyone got the exact same amount of nicotine in reality so here the belief effect isn't just changing what one subjectively experiences oh this is the effect of high nicotine or low nicotine it actually is changing the way that the brain responds to the belief and that to me is absolutely wild now there are a couple of other things that could have confounded this first of all it could have been that if you believe you got a lot of nicotine you're just faster where you're reading the lines better or your response time to hit the button is quicker you know I tell you you have a drug that's going to improve reaction time you might believe that about nicotine and so you're quicker on the trigger and you're getting they have a different activation more activation um there could be they rule that out they also rule out the possibility how to bid rule that out by looking at rates of of pressing and there was nothing and in sensory areas of the brain that would would um represent that kind of difference they don't see that the other thing that um is very clear is that the connection between the thalamus and the ventral medial prefrontal cortex that pathway scales in the most beautiful way such that people that were told they had smoked a low or Vaped a low amount of nicotine got a subtle activation of that pathway people that were told that they got a moderate amount of nicotine got a more robust activation of that pathway and the people that were told that they got a high amount of nicotine in The Vape Pen saw a very robust activation of the thalamus to this ventral prefrontal cortical pathway now of course this is all happening under the hood of the skull simply on the basis of what they were told and what they believe and technically the fmri is showing the activation of those two areas and that's how you can infer the strength of that connection that's right there's a separate method called diffuser tensor Imaging which was developed I believe out of the group in Minnesota Minnesota has a very robust group in terms of neuroimaging um that can measure activation and fiber Pathways this is not that but you can look at the timing of activation and it's a known what we call monosynaptic Pathway so we haven't talked so much about figures here but um I guess if we were going to look at any one figure um and I can just describe it for the audience that's not paying doesn't have the figure in front of them the uh let's see the the most um probably the most important figure is figure two remember I said I like to read the titles of figures which is that the belief about nicotine strength induced a dose dependent response in the thalamus basically if you and figure 2B um can tell you if they believe that they got more nicotine that's uh that's essentially the response that they that they saw so if you look or sorry panel e if you look at the belief rating as a function of the estimate in the thalamus of what how much activation there was it's a it's a mess when you look at all the dots at once but if you just separate it out by high medium and low you run the statistics what you find is that there's a gradual increase but a legitimate one from low to medium to high in other words if I tell you this is a high dose of nicotine your brain will react as if it's a high dose of nicotine now what they didn't do was give people zero nicotine I was about to say there's a control that's missing yeah right yeah so what they didn't do is give people zero nicotine and then tell them uh this is a high amount of nicotine sort of the equivalent of the cruel High School experiment no alcohol but then the the kid acts drunk now in the uh in the High School example it's unclear whether or not the kid actually felt drunk or not um it's unclear whether or not they had been drunk previously if they even knew what it would be like to feel drunk Etc and there's the social context what I find just outrageous and outrageously interesting about this study is simply that what we are told about the dose of a drug changes the way that our physiology responds to the dose of the drug and in and in my understanding this is the first study to ever look at dose dependence of belief effects right to really and why would that be important well for almost every study of drugs you look at a dose-dependent curve you look at zero low-dose medium dose high dose and here they they clearly are seeing a dose dependent response simply to the understanding of what they expect the drug ought to do in other words you can bypass pharmacology somewhat right now look at figure 2B am I reading this correctly so it's got um four bars on there you've got the group who we're told they got a low dose the group who was told they got a medium dose the group that was told they had a high dose and then these healthy controls right who presumably were non-smokers who were just put in the machine that's right yeah yeah this is measuring parameter estimate what is that referring to um their ability to play the the the the trading game uh the parameter estimate is the is the activation um reward related activities from independent to almost mask right so what they're doing is they're just saying if we just look at the thalamus what is the level of activation I see so this suggests that the only statistical difference was between the low and the high that's right and nobody else was statistically different that's right but that's not the whole story no that's not the whole story so when you look at the output from the thalamus to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex that's where you start to identify the is that figure four uh that is yes so this is where you see um so figure 4B if you look at parameter estimates so this is the degree of activation between the thalamus and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and it's called the instructed belief you can see that there's a low medium and high scatter of dots for each and that each one of those is significant so isn't it interesting that at the thalamus which is and you'll you'll immediately appreciate my stupidity when it comes to Neuroscience which is more proximate to the nicotinamide or nicotine that nicotinamide what do you call it the nicotine acetylcholine receptor you have a lower difference of signal strength and somehow that got Amplified as it made its way forward in the brain yeah does that surprise you it is surprising and it surprised them as well that the interpretation they give again as we're talking about before important to match their conclusions against what they actually found which is what we're doing here the interpretation that they give is that it doesn't take much nicotinic receptor occupancy in the thalamus to activate this pathway but they too were surprised that they could not detect a raw difference in the activation of Thalamus but in terms of its output to the prefrontal cortex that's when because that figure 4B is more convincing than figure two because even figure 2E if you read the fine print the r the correlation coefficient is 0.27 that's it's not that strong right it's weak so at the thalamus it's kind of like yeah there might be a signal by the way this goes back to our earlier discussion there could be a huge signal here and we're underpowered how many subjects were in this this you wouldn't have a lot of subjects in this experiment yeah this is no you it and this just speaks to the general challenge of doing this kind of work it's hard to get a lot of people in and through the scanner yeah it's expensive it's expensive uh we have to I should know this but we can um we can go back to the but you can sort of just look at the number of dots on here I mean it's in the low tens right it's like 40 30 something like that it's not so it's possible you do this with a Danish study yeah you do this with a thousand people this could all be statistically significant right it was um so they talk about this you know based on this we estimated that an N of 20 n a sample size in each belief condition the final sample would provide 90 power hour to detect an effect of this magnitude at an alpha of 0.0 0.5 and a two-tailed um test okay so that's that's them referring to what we just talked about which is the power we believe at 90 confidence to get an alpha of 0.05 which means we'll want to be 95 confidence we need 60 people 20 per group right yeah but if the difference is smaller than what they expected they'll miss out on some of the significance which that looks like they're missing between the medium and High group yep and I too was surprised that um they did not see a difference in the between the medium and the High group but they did in the output of the thalamus I was also surprised that they didn't see a difference this is kind of interesting in its own right if figure three talks about their belief about nicotine strength did not modulate the reward response the dopamine response how was that measured also just in fmri yeah exactly so if you look at figure 3B other people can't see it but basically oh yeah what you'll see is that there's no difference between these different groups um in terms of the amount amount of activation in these reward Pathways if people got a low medium or high amount of nicotine now that actually could be leveraged I believe if somebody were trying to quit nicotine for instance and they were going to do that by progressively reducing the amount of nicotine that they were taking but you told them that it was the same amount one from one day to the next you could Whittle it down to presumably to a low amount before taking it to zero and if they believed it to be a greater amount then it might actually not uh disrupt their reward Pathways meaning they would feel um presumably they'd feel rewarded by whatever nicotine they were bringing in what would be your prediction if this experiment were repeated but it was done exactly the same way with non-smokers well one thing that's sort of um interesting you asked about art potential sources of of artifact problems with fmri one of the challenges that they know in the study was you have to stay very still in the in the machine but the subjects were constantly coughing because they're smokers so okay so presumably the data would be higher Fidelity started chuckling at that one but I I was like I had to read that one twice oh that makes sense like there's smokers they're coughing they can't stay still so movement artifact um but in all seriousness I think that for people that are naive to nicotine even a small amount of nicotine is likely to get this pathway activated to such a great degree sort of like the first time effect of pretty much any drug but I wonder if they would be more or less susceptible to the belief system yeah that's a really good question right because they have no prior to compare it to they have no Pleasant they have no experience to compare it to with respect to the obviously beneficial effects of nicotine that the smokers are well used to so this is the the poor kid that got duped into thinking the non-alcoholic beer was at alcohol though they're actually the winner we know because I did an episode and alcohol alcohol is bad for you so in the end that kid wins and the other ones lose poetic justice but um that kid having never been actually drunk before presumably I would feel like they're being more susceptible that's my guess as well so you know my glee for this experiment is not or this paper rather is not because I think it's the be all end-all or it's a perfect experiment I just think it's so very cool that they're starting to explore dose dependence of belief because that has all sorts of implications I mean um use your imagination folks whether or not we're talking about um a drug we're talking about a behavioral intervention we're talking about a vaccine and I'm not referring to any one specific vaccine I'm just talking to vaccines generally I'm talking about psychoactive drugs I'm talking about illicit drugs I'm talking about antidepressants I'm talking about all the sorts of drugs we were talking about before metformin Etc just throw our arms around all of it what we believe about the effects of a drug presumably in addition to what we believe about how much we're taking and what those effects ought to be clearly are impacting at least the way that our brain reacts to to those drugs yeah it's very interesting I mean when you consider how many drugs that have peripheral effects um or peripheral outputs begin with Central issues so again I think the glp-1 agonists are such a great example yeah yeah um you know I don't think anybody fully understands exactly how they're working but it's hard to argue that they're impacting that the glp-1 analog is is having a central impact it's doing something in the brain that is leading to a reduction of appetite we believe that yeah yeah and I think the mouse data point to different areas of the hypothalamus that are related to satiety that that say it's at least possible yeah I mean that you know there's no quicker way to make a mouse overeat or under eat than by lesioning it's hypothalamus depending on where you do so so presumably these drugs work there but again it speaks to like what do you need to believe in order for that to be the case have they done Placebo trials there where people get something and they're told I mean of course those drugs have all been tested via Placebo and the placebo groups you know don't do anywhere near as well that's how we know that there's activity of the drug but but again there's you know that's a little bit different than being told you are absolutely getting it right because in the rcts you're just told you might be getting it you might not be getting it so it's not quite the same as this experiment this experiment is is one level up where you're being told no you're absolutely getting it you're just getting different doses of it yeah to take this to maybe the ADHD realm let's say a kid has been on ADHD meds for a while and the parents for whatever reason the physician decide they want to cut back on the dosage um but if they were to tell the kid it's the same dosage they've always been taking and it's had a certain positive effect for them according to the results at least in this paper which are not definitive but are interesting the lower dose may be as effective simply on the basis of belief and and this is the part that makes it so cool to me is that and it's not a kid tricking themselves or the parents tricking the kid so much as the brain activation is corresponding to the belief right so that's where this is this is why because it's done in the brain I think we can um you know it gets to these kind of abstract uh nearly mystical but not quite mystical aspects of belief effects which is that you know your brain is a prediction making machine it's a data interpretation machine but it's clear that one of the more important pieces of data are your beliefs about how these things impact you uh so it's not that this bypasses physiology people aren't deluding themselves the thalamus is behaving as if it's a high dose when it's the same dose as the low dose group wild yeah I mean I think of the implications for example with blood pressure right like we don't really understand essential hypertension which is the majority of people walking around with high blood pressure it's unclear ideology um so lots of people being treated how do we know that the belief system about it can't be changed and um yeah this is this is I don't know this is eye-opening yeah it's cool stuff and Ali crumb is on to some other really cool stuff like for instance um just to highlight where these belief effects are starting to show up if you tell a group that the side effects of a drug that they're taking are evidence that the drug really works for the purpose that they're taking it even though those side effects are kind of annoying people report the experiences less awful and they report more relief from the primary symptoms that they're trying to Target so our belief about what side effects are that's so interesting can really impact how quickly and how um compatible we feel about how quickly a drug Works excuse me and how compatible we feel that drug is with our entire life so maybe if we call them something else like not side effects but like additional benefits or something it's kind of crazy and you don't want to lie to people obviously but you also don't want to send yourself in the opposite direction which is reading the list of side effects of a drug and then developing all of those side effects um when and then maybe later coming to the understanding that some of those were raised through belief effects um we definitely see that that's the nocebo effect right that's that's the one we see a lot uh you know with all sorts of drugs and it's tough because you know how do you how do you know which is which and I think there are some people who are really impacted by that and it makes it very difficult for them to take any sort of pharmacologic agent because they basically they can't help but incur every possible side effect um is it or is it true that medical students often will start developing the symptoms of the different diseases that they're learning about is that true well you know I'll tell you I do think that in medical school you start to you start to think of the zebras more than the horses all the time you know like you know what I'm referring to right now you know you see Footprints you you see hoof prints you should think of horses but of course medical students you only think of the zebras there are some really funny things in medical school like there are certain conditions that you spend so much time thinking about that you have a very warped sense of their prevalence uh like in medical school there's this condition called sarcoidosis like we I feel like we never stop talking about sarcoidosis I've seen like three cases in my life right like it's just not that common um does it provide a great teaching tool or something I don't know like I just some of these things I don't know uh how much time did we spend talking about cytus and verses this is when people embryologically have a reversed rotation and everything in their body is flipped literally everything is flipped so their heart is on their right side their liver is on the left side their appendix is on the left side like and so I'm not making this up how common is this I've never seen it okay I was thinking about boxing in the liver shot like you could easily be going for the wrong side of the body no I swear to God like as a medical student if you were told someone had left-sided lower quadrant pain to which the answer is almost assuredly like they have diverticulitis you'd think they could have appendicitis in the context of cytus and versus like the fact that I would even register in the top 10 things that it could possibly be wow but yes you just have a totally warped sense of what's out there oh man well um this has been Pure Pleasure for me I don't know about yeah I don't know about our listeners but for me this is among the things that I just Delight in and and even more so because you're the one across the table for me teaching me about these incredible findings and and the gaps in those findings which are equally incredible because they're equally important to know about yeah so let's do this again in Austin absolutely next time on your home court very well and bring a little bit of that due if you've got it oh yeah yeah I'll bring a low medium and high low medium and higher thanks Peter you're the best thanks sir thank you for joining me for today's Journal Club discussion with Dr Peter attia if you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast please subscribe to our YouTube channel that's a terrific zero cost way to support us in addition please subscribe to the podcast on both Spotify and apple and on both Spotify and apple you can leave us up to a five-star review if you have questions for me or comments about the podcast or guests that you'd like me to consider hosting on the huberman Lab podcast please put those in the comments section on YouTube I do read all the comments please also check out the sponsors mentioned at the beginning and throughout today's episode that's the best way to support this podcast not so much on today's episode but on many previous episodes of The huberman Lab podcast we discuss supplements while supplements aren't necessary for everybody many people derive tremendous benefit from them for things like enhancing sleep for hormone support and for Focus the huberman Lab podcast has partnered with momentous supplements if you'd like to access the supplements discussed on the huberman Lab podcast you can go to live momentous spelled ous so it's livemomentis.com huberman and you can also receive 20 off again that's live momentous spelled ous.com slash huberman if you haven't already subscribed to our neural network newsletter our neural network newsletter is a completely zero cost monthly newsletter that includes summaries of podcast episodes as well as protocols that is short PDFs describing for instance tools to improve sleep tools to improve neuroplasticity we talk about deliberate cold exposure Fitness various aspects of mental health again all completely zero cost and to sign up you simply go to hubermanlab.com go over to the menu in the corner scroll down to newsletter and provide your email we do not share your email with anybody if you're not already following me on social media I am huberman lab on all platforms so that's Instagram Twitter threads LinkedIn and Facebook and at all of those places I talk about science and science related tools some of which overlaps with the content of the huberman Lab podcast but much of which is distinct from the content of the huberman Lab podcast again it's huberman lab on all social media platforms thank you one again for joining me for today's Journal Club discussion with Dr Peter attia and last but certainly not least thank you for your interest in science [Music]

========================================

